Spatial Economics and Totalitarian Temptations: The Complex Biography of August Lösch (1906-1945)

www.ssoar.infoSpatial Economics and Totalitarian Temptations:The Complex Biography of August Lösch(1906-1945)Take, GunnarVeröffentlichungsversion / Published VersionZeitschriftenartikel / journal articleEmpfohlene Zitierung / Suggested Citation:Take, G. (2023). Spatial Economics and Totalitarian Temptations: The Complex Biography of August Lösch(1906-1945). Region: the journal of ERSA, 10(3), 19-30. https://doi.org/10.18335/region.v10i3.490Nutzungsbedingungen:Dieser Text wird unter einer CC BY Lizenz (Namensnennung) zurVerfügung gestellt. Nähere Auskünfte zu den CC-Lizenzen findenSie hier:https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.deTerms of use:This document is made available under a CC BY Licence(Attribution). For more Information see:https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0Volume 10, Number 3, 2023, 19–30 journal homepage: region.ersa.orgDOI: 10.18335/region.v10i1.490 ISSN: 2409-5370Spatial Economics and Totalitarian Temptations:The Complex Biography of August Lösch (1906-1945)Gunnar Take11 University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, GermanyReceived: 20 April 2023/Accepted: 25 June 2023Abstract. Among the German spatial economists August Lösch is arguably the onewho has had the biggest lasting influence on international academic literature. After hisdeath in May 1945, a legend was created according to which he was a fierce opponentto national socialism. This was part of the attempts of his former colleagues and of theGerman economics community at large to disguise the extent of their own involvementand their agency in advising economic and social policies of the Nazi regime. The politicalcontext of spatial planning during the Second World War was particularly damning asit in many cases presupposed genocides on nations such as Poles and Russians and onreligious groups such as Jews. It was precisely with regards to Eastern Europe thatLösch’s theoretical contributions were deemed to be particularly valuable. However, thelegend of his supposed opposition contained a grain of truth as he was indeed appalledby central aspects of Nazi ideology. Yet, the ability of a totalitarian regime such as the“Third Reich” to integrate the contributions of a brilliant mind and somebody who sawhimself as an independent and unpolitical scholar into its decentralized and collaborativespatial research apparatus is what makes Lösch’s biography particularly interesting andrelevant today.1 IntroductionIt has been argued that August Lösch (1906-1945) “is the German spatial economist whohas had the biggest lasting influence on international academic literature, far beyond thediscipline of economics” (Bröcker 2014, p. 223). His contributions to the emerging field ofspatial economics, as well as to demography and monetary economics, were well receivednot only in the late Weimar Republic and in the “Third Reich”, but also in the USAby prominent scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter who took him under his wing. Sincethe 1940s, Lösch’s own work and the more practically oriented Central Places Theory ofhis close colleague Walter Christaller were adapted by spatial planners in very differentcountries such as Sweden, communist Poland, and Israel (Trezib 2014, Venhoff 2000).Christaller’s contributions to national socialist spatial planning are well documented,as is his political opportunism with successive memberships in the leftist USPD/SPD,the national socialist NSDAP, the communist KPD and the centre left SPD. Lösch’sbiography is less well known and his character seems much more complex, ambiguous,and in his constant quest for meaning in life also very relatable. Thus, his life constitutesa suitable historical case study for reflecting on the manifold application possibilities ofspatial economics and on the authoritarian or even totalitarian temptations that scientistsmight face today.1920 G. TakeLösch was an independent-minded intellectual but at the same time he craved forthe praise of his fellow academics and “practitioners”. Among his estate is a carefullyassembled collection of positive reviews of his magnum opus The Economics of Location(1940b, posthumously translated into English in 1954). One of those is an assessment bystate secretary Hermann Muhs, head of the Reich’s office for regional planning (RfR).According to Muhs, Lösch’s book “contains an abundance of scientific insights which areof the upmost importance for the tasks of the RfR”1. This was no empty rhetoric. Aftera meeting with Muhs in December 1942, the time when the German armies had justreached their greatest expansion, Lösch agreed to publish a second edition (Lösch 1944).It was supposed to be even more suited to the needs of those who drew up concreteplans for the newly conquered territories in central and eastern Europe. In his diary,Lösch expressed his excitement: “I am not expected to describe what is but to map outwhat should be” (Riegger 1971, p. 109). Like other economists such as John MaynardKeynes (Keynes 1936), he understood that big ideas such as his vision for ultra-rationalspatial planning could be very powerful even if he remained in his “unpolitical” role asa technocrat.Despite seeking collaborations with figures such as Muhs and his attempts to optimizethe totalitarian German administrations, Lösch was heralded as an opponent to Nazirule and even depicted as a martyr immediately after his death in late May 1945. Anunlikely coalition of his former German colleagues, his widow, and his American friendsand acquaintances created a myth around him (Take 2019, p. 387–389). Whereas thelatter were merely careless in trusting Lösch’s self-portrayal and ignoring the contextsof his work during the Second World War (Kegler 2015, Barnes 2016), the former hada discernible agenda. In order to be able to continue their research after 1945, they putmuch effort in turning Lösch into a beacon of integrity which in turn let their own darkactivities during the “Third Reich” seem as a publicly acceptable grey area. Thus, theycircumvent a reckoning with the fraught history of German spatial research which hasonly recently begun in earnest (Baumgart 2020, Werner 2022).Even nowadays, Lösch is often viewed in a positive light: “Lösch in contrast [toChristaller], was not only a great scientist but also a clear sighted, honest, and steadfastman” (Todt 2014, p. 204, Nijkamp 2020). In this article I argue that Lösch was indeedopposed to central aspects of the fascist ideology and that he felt liberated when theSecond World War ended. That should not, however, deflect from the historical truththat he worked together with influential und staunch Nazis and that his work was highlyvalued by them until the very end. In fact, the ability of a totalitarian regime such asthe “Third Reich” to integrate the contributions of somebody who regarded himself asan independent and unpolitical scholar, sometimes even as an opponent of the regime,into its decentralized and collaborative spatial research and planning apparatus is whatmakes Lösch’s biography particularly interesting and relevant today. In the following, Iwill pay particular attention to his youth during the turbulent Weimar Republic, to theopportunities he enjoyed and the pressures he faced in the course of his adult life, andto the contexts of his research in the 1930s and 1940s.2 Youth and EducationLösch was born on 16 October 1906 in Württemberg, a state in the south of the GermanReich. After his mother and his father, a merchant, split up two years later, he wasraised at his maternal grandparents’ home in the small city of Heidenheim an der Brenz.In sharp contrast to older generations, he experienced significant political and economicturbulences during his childhood, not only during World War I (1914-1918), but alsowith regard to the hyperinflation (1922-23) and the Allied occupation of the Ruhr (1923-25). However, he grew up in the relative security of the upper middle class and belongedto the privileged few who were given the opportunity to visit a gymnasium. Entries inhis diary suggest that he began searching for a purpose in life already in his childhoodand that class affiliation influenced his identity: “I do not hate the workers, they are1Muhs to Wirtschaftsstelle des Deutschen Buchhandels, 3 July 1942. Stadtarchiv Heidenheim, estateof August Lösch (henceforth: Lösch estate), box XVREGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023G. Take 21deplorable, misled. [. . . ] The middle classes are best equipped to think objectively”2.Those early entries also reveal patriotic feelings and a devout Christianity, both of whichinfluenced his opinions on current political events such as the ongoing disputes aboutreparations after the Treaty of Versailles3.After his graduation (Abitur) in 1925, Lösch completed a commercial apprenticeshipat a factory for medical products in Heidenheim. From 1927 to 1932, he studied eco-nomics and law – a typical combination at the time – while also taking courses on awide variety of subjects such as history, philosophy, sociology, French, and English. Hisenormous studiousness and willingness to broaden his horizons earned him one of thevery few scholarships. Switching universities remarkably often (in chronological order:Tübingen, Freiburg, Kiel, Bonn, Freiburg, Bonn), he was able to attend lectures of mostof Germany’s leading economists such as Walter Eucken, Gerhard Colm, Adolph Lowe,Joseph Schumpeter and Arthur Spiethoff. Common themes during these lectures werethe use of statistics and an involvement in the emerging field of business cycle theory.Lösch’s academic excellence soon opened up many opportunities for him. He workedat Spiethoff’s social and economic research institute in Bonn, he became part of Schum-peter’s study group, and he participated in the intellectual and leisure activities of theinner circle around the philosopher Martin Heidegger. His first economic paper waspublished in a leading German journal in 1930 (Lösch 1930), a year before he earnedhis diploma. Besides these achievements, he was engaged in the self-government of thestudent service in Tübingen, was chairman of a student body of a faculty in Bonn, andfrequently wrote letters, political memoranda, and speeches about matters such as social-ism and the state of political education. Many of them were pessimistic in tone, showinggreat discontent with the state of German academia and revealing a deeply felt struggleto find meaning in life.Lösch clearly felt proud of being en route to becoming a member of the academicelites. At the same time, he wanted to remain a free-thinking outsider and – ratherparadoxically, but not atypically for a German during this period – longed for a feel-ing of national unity during the turbulent domestic and international political strugglesof the late Weimar Republic. Averse to party politics and to the involvement of theless educated classes in the political opinion-forming process, he advocated for a highersense of responsibility among academics in combination with a more aristocratic formof leadership to solve the manifold political and social divisions4. Lösch neither joinedthe growing far-right student groups nor was he close to center-left student organizationswhich regarded the political arena as a legitimate forum for class struggles and aimed atpreserving democracy. Instead, he belonged to the conservative elites. Their longing foran authoritarian regime unlimited by a separation of powers is seen as a decisive factorin the Fascists rise to power (Herbert 2016, p. 32).Among other issues, Lösch took a stance on the question of German reparations for thedamages caused during the First World War. He demanded not to “silently pay thoseunprecedented tributes“5, but to break international treatises instead by terminatingremittances. He expected detrimental effects that would go beyond the economic sphere,but more importantly, he anticipated “the invaluable benefit that Germany regains itspride and a unified will [. . . ] one will!”6. This signals a shift to the right and stands incontrast to Lösch‘s earlier positions during his youth. Back in 1923, 16-year-old Löschhad accepted “that Germany would not play a role as a superpower for 100-200 years.It will be succeeded by Europe”7.2August Lösch, diary entry, 18 March 1923. Lösch estate, box XII3A week after the French occupation of the Ruhr in January 1923, 16-year-old Lösch wrote: “Loveshould even be felt towards the French”. Lösch, diary entry, 23 January 1923. Ibid.4August Lösch: Politische Bildung?, June 1929. Lösch estate, box XIII5Mehr Stolz! Eine Bemerkung zur Reparationspolitik von August Lösch, undated (probably between1929-1932). Lösch estate6Ibid.7August Lösch, diary entry, 23 January 1923. Lösch estate, box XIIREGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 202322 G. Take3 Early Career in the Weimar Republic, in Nazi Germany and in the USAFor his dissertation and his Habilitation, Lösch looked for a hotly contested political topic(Lösch 1932, foreword). He chose demographic change in Germany, analyzing it first froma macroeconomic and political standpoint and then with regards to business cycle theory.Written in 1930 and published in 1932, the leading question of his dissertation was:“How should one view the decreasing birth rates?” According to Lösch’s analysis, theeffects were overwhelmingly positive, raising individual wealth, decreasing social tensions,and stabilizing liberal democracies by reducing the unpropertied and supposedly easilyradicalized working class (Lösch 1932). Initially, the political right valued his work. In1930, he won the precious Karl Helfferich Prize, named after a leading right-wing andantisemitic politician. Lösch had been careful to include an assessment of the questionmost important to nationalists and those wanting to reverse the effects of the lost firstWorld War, namely whether decreasing birth rates would be detrimental to Germany’sfuture military potential. He concluded that slower growth rates on average lead to moreeducated, intelligent, and also more determined individuals, as even the poor would havesomething to fight for (Lösch 1932).Initially after the Nazis’ seizure of power, Lösch’s positions were deemed to be insidethe range of opinions permitted by the regime’s censorship. For example, he was allowedto publish a mixed review of the new and ideologically highly charged journal DeutscherLebensraum – Blätter für neue deutsche Raum- und Bevölkerungspolitik8. He doubtedthe asserted lack of space and pointed out that on the contrary, a lack of people wasmuch more likely in the near future (Lösch 1933). Thus, Lösch rejected the Nazis’ claimof a detrimental German overpopulation and did not supply scientific support for theideological demands for acquiring new territories. Instead, he saw increased populationdensity as a driving force for technical and economic progress (Lösch 1932). However, hehimself published three times in said journal in 1933/34, hence contributing to the “livelyengagement with those highly political issues” (Lösch 1933, p. 158) which he regardedas necessary.In 1936 things changed and Lösch’s dissertation was put on a list of “detrimentaland unwanted literature” by the Reich’s ministry for propaganda. This was probablydue to a combination of a narrowing range of permitted opinions and a crackdown onself-publishing – a method which Lösch had used to stay independent. Yet, a documentprobably written in 1937 or 1938 raises the question whether he subsequently changedhis mind or whether he developed or at least experimented with political opinions thatdiffered from his scientific views. The document in question is a four-page manuscriptwhich sketches out a historical narrative and is easily compatible with Nazi ideology. Init, Lösch argued that “we [the Germans] have long lived in an unbearable density, thefight for more space is old and the main theme of our history, a tragic story. [. . . ] Dueto our political palsy, our brave and growing people was continually thrown back to itsold state: being a people without space”9. It is unclear in how far this position was inline with Lösch’s stance towards the German annexations and conquests since the late1930s. It has to be noted that he did not publish this essay, even though doing so wouldlikely have had a beneficial impact on his career.During the mid
-1930s, Lösch mostly conducted research on causal links betweenchanges in population and business cycles. While many other scholars suffered cutsto their funding due to the Great Depression or the manifold political disruptions in theGerman academic landscape in 1933, Lösch was in the privileged position to be able tofully concentrate on his research and to publish his second book in 1936. He hugely prof-ited from the support of the Rockefeller Foundation, which not only paid his wages atSpiethoff’s institute in Bonn10, but also gave Lösch a significant personal grant, allowing8German living space – journal for a new German spatial and demographical politics9Die Erweiterung unseres Lebensraumes im Lauf der Geschichte von August Loesch, undated (prob-ably 1937/38). Lösch estate, box IV10v. Beckerath: Bericht über die Gemeinschaftsarbeiten zur Frage der neuesten Handelspolitik in ihrenBeziehungen zum Wirtschaftssystem und in ihrer Bedeutung für die gegenwärtige Weltwirtschaftskrise,19 December 1932. Rockefeller Archive Center (RAC), RF, RG 1.1, S. 717.S, b. 20, f. 188REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023G. Take 23him to travel through the USA from late November 1934 to early December 193511. Thepurpose was to connect with America’s leading economists and to study the “[i]nfluenceof political frontiers upon the territorial division of labor“12, thus initiating his next re-search project. This would result in his most important work: the economics of location(1940b).Therefore, it has to be concluded that until early 1936, Lösch’s career and his scientificachievements continued to progress without any negative impact from the Nazis’ seizureof power. Being financially independent helped, but it was not the sole factor. He alsolargely kept his head down and did not join those who spoke out against the demolitionof democracy and human rights and those who openly opposed the discriminations andkillings for political and racial reasons which were initiated in March and April 1933.There seems to have been one exception, though. Lösch himself later recalled in aletter written in May 1945 to the emigrant Hans Singer how he himself had pushed forthe conviction of a person guilty of antisemitic smearings twelve years ago, despite theperpetrator having belonged to the SS13. Lösch apparently had spoken out on behalf ofthe Jew Singer in a public meeting of the student body of his faculty, arguing that “their[the Jews’] fathers had fought for Germany [in the First World War] exactly like ourfathers did”14.Lösch’s attitude towards the events of 1933 was ambivalent. Surviving letters andcontemporary entries in his diary bespeak his strong rejection of antisemitism and ofrestrictions of academic and religious freedoms, personal rights, and the anti-scientificrhetoric of the Nazis (Riegger 1971). However, he clearly wrestled with his various partialidentities. On the one hand, he was a devout Christian and a “Southern German”15,which meant that he belonged to a liberal tradition opposed to militaristic northernPrussianism. On the other hand, he could not escape the allure of re-emerging Germangreatness and the propagated feeling of national unity which he had longed for sincehis childhood. In a letter to Schumpeter (Harvard University) Lösch wrote in June1933: “Quite a few of my old dreams are now fulfilled”16. By this he meant “nationalcommunity, order, pride!”17 The term “national community” (Volksgemeinschaft) iskey, as it contained the notion of racial (Aryan) cohesion, repudiated the innate clashof interests in industrializing modern societies, and functioned as a bulwark against(supposedly Bolshevik) class struggles (Bajohr, Wildt 2009), which Lösch detested.In another letter to Schumpeter in September 1933, Lösch wrote: “I can feel thedeeper meaning in what is now emerging [in Germany]; it is thrilling to see hope returningto the eyes of so many; and there is even a breath of fresh air at the universities. [. . . ]I wrestle with a calm and clear stance, because I do not only see the dark side, butthe bright side as well”18. Lösch saw a “greater good” in national socialism and hopedthat “negative plebeian side effects”19 such as the dismissals of antifascists and peopleof “non-Aryan descent” from public service and the burning of books would pass. Thesurviving diary entries and his letters do not give evidence of him acknowledging theextent of the first wave of killings and the massive street violence all across Germany inSpring 1933.Simultaneously to his partial appraisal of Nazism, Lösch considered himself to beamong its victims. This is certainly true to some degree, since he decided not to join anyNS organizations and thus was not able to fully achieve his dreams of becoming a profes-11Lösch “is looked upon by the German Committee as the ablest of this year’s appointees.“ RAC,RF, fellowship recorder cards, RG 10.2, Disciple 5: Humanities Fellows, Germany, August Lösch12Ibid.13Lösch to Hans Singer, 1 May 1945. Stadtarchiv Heidenheim, estate of Lösch, box XIII. Löschdepicted the story slightly differently in a diary entry from July 1933. See the Online Lösch Archivecompiled by Dr. David Bieri: 385-386 (https://www.august-loesch.org, last accessed 30 September 2022)14Lösch to Hans Singer, 1 May 1945. Lösch estate, box XIII. These claims were later supported byWolfgang F. Stolper, although details remain contradictory. Stolper: Begegnung mit August Lösch. InRiegger (1971, p. 56f)15Lösch to Joseph Schumpeter. Bonn, 28 September 1933. Online Lösch Archive: 5516Lösch to Schumpeter, 8 June 1933. Lösch estate, box XIII17Lösch: diary entry July 1933. Online Lösch Archive: 38818Lösch to Schumpeter. Bonn, 28 September 1933. Online Lösch-Archive: 5519Lösch to Irmgard, 8 June 1933. See the collection “August Lösch: Briefe & andere Korrespondenz”compiled by Dr. David Bieri: 57 (https://www.august-loesch.org, last accessed 30 September 2022)REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 202324 G. Takesor. However, his self-perception of suffering a “purgatory”20 seems exaggerated. Thisself-victimization served a purpose though. To solitarily endure suffering for a greatergood – the greatness of his fatherland, “for that Germany which will come thereafter[after the “Third Reich”], if God wishes”21 – in a way provided a solution for Lösch’slife long search for a purpose in life. This in turn allowed him to remain impassionatetowards the suffering of those who have to be regarded as the real victims of nationalsocialism, those whose livelihoods were destroyed, who were forced into exile, or thosehundreds of thousands of Germans and millions of other Europeans who were killed forpolitical and racist reasons.In his diary in 1933 and later in retrospect in May 1945, Lösch claimed that he hadabruptly and completely abandoned his academic career when the Nazis seized power.Yet, that is not quite the case. In fact, he decided to submit his second book as aHabilitation at the University of Bonn, which elevated him to “Dr. habil.” in 1936.Nevertheless, Lösch did not automatically acquire the license to teach (Venia Legendi).To become a professor or at least a lecturer, he would have had to visit an ideologicalacademy, join at least one or two lesser national socialist organizations, and put someideological phrases in his publications. Lösch decided not to follow this easy conformistpath22. Still, it has to be noted that his Habilitation later enabled him to progress froma university assistant to leader of a research group in 1940, thus opening up a career ata research institute albeit not at a university.After an interim stay in Bonn from December 1935 to November 1936 which theRockefeller Foundation had mandated, Lösch was given the means for a second voyagethrough the USA. Again, he collected data for his research on spatial economics andvisited scholars in Harvard, Chicago, Washington D.C., and elsewhere. Lösch was par-ticularly interested in studying the American Midwest, as “it is hard to find such a casestudy in Germany, where regions are smaller, everything is determined by long histories,and economic factors cannot exert their influence as cleanly and simply”23. There isno indicator that Lösch reflected on the fact that this supposedly blank slate on whichAmerican capitalism was able to operate had been created by genocides of the indige-nous peoples. He also does not seem to have recognized the profound racism which theUSA was built on. As a well-off white man, he naively celebrated American freedom andenterprise and looked down on “the negroes, sitting on swings in the middle of the daylike children”24.Prior to both returns to Germany in December 1935 and in February 1938, Löschhad agreed secret codes with Schumpeter. They were to be used in case his passport wasconfiscated, he wanted to flee Germany, or he was imprisoned25. Feeling unsafe – althoughit is debatable whether he had reasons to – and not wanting to pursue a career at thenazified universities, the question arises why he returned twice at all. He had very muchenjoyed (academic) life in the USA, and he had offers for jobs at renowned universitiesthere and elsewhere26. His motives are unclear. Homesickness probably played a part.It could also be argued that he needed to support his family. His grandmother haddied in debt in early 1938, his single mother was still alive, and he was engaged witha younger woman (Erika Marga Müller, 1914-2002) since May 1936. However, backin Germany he did not seek a lucrative position in the private sector but prioritizedfinishing his book on the economics of location, which he accomplished in the autumn of1939 (Lösch 1940b). Meanwhile, Lösch remained impassive towards political events suchas the increasing discriminations against “non-Aryans” and political nonconformists.Although he anticipated the outbreak of a large-scale war, he followed the call for a20Lösch to Schumpeter, October 1933. Riegger 1971: 8421Lösch: diary entry, April 1933. Riegger (1971, p. 78, emphasis by Lösch)22However, Lösch volunteered for becoming a group leader in the paramilitary sports (Wehrsport).Lösch to Schumpeter, 8 June 1933. Lösch estate, box XIII23Lösch to Eucken, 21 June 1935. Online Lösch Archive: 8724Lösch: diary entry, October 1937. Riegger 1971: 97–9825Lösch to Schumpeter, undated [late 1935] and 17 February 1938. Online Lösch Archive: 122,198–19926Lösch also discussed becoming an adviser to the Venezuelan government. Lösch to Joseph Schum-peter, 30 April 1937, and June 1938. Online Lösch Archive: 167–169, 203REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023G. Take 25two-month-long military training in the summer of 193827. Thus, as a man in his early30s, he sleepwalked into a dilemma which then manifested itself in September 1939, whenGermany invaded Poland. Apart from emigrating, an option which was still open to him,he could either face the increasingly likely risk of getting called up to military service orfind a safe job, one which was deemed relevant for the German war effort. He chose thelatter.4 Leader of a Research Group during World War IIOn 15th January 1940, Lösch moved to Kiel, a port city in the north of Germany wherehe had briefly studied in 1929/30. There, he was employed by the Kiel Institute for theWorld Economy, first as a research assistant and from April 1940 onwards as leader of aresearch group consisting of five to six scientists and four to five non-academic members28.Lösch’s work during the second World War can be divided into three parts: research onspatial economics, other independent research, and commissioned work. The latter wasby far the most time consuming. Until 1944, the “Lösch Research Group” finished roughly30 reports of various sizes. More than half were commissioned by the Wehrmacht’sBureau for Economic Warfare, five by the Foreign Office, some by national agenciesfor spatial economic research, and a few by the Reich’s Ministry for Armament. Löschoccupied a leadership position, represented the institute in dealings with its customersand was hard-working, receiving more overtime allowances than any of his roughly 140colleagues29.Lösch was well aware of the reasons why the different state agencies commissionedthese reports. Only some can be highlighted here. The Wehrmacht for example wantedinformation on how to conduct its wars of aggression and annihilation most efficiently.While other research groups at the Kiel Institute were responsible for supplying dataon the economic and social situations of current and future enemies, Lösch’s group didthe more demanding research. In the beginning, it analyzed international commercialcontracts of Great Britain and France, the family support of draftees in both countries,English food supply, and many other topics. In July 1940, Lösch answered the importantquestion “Can England be starved out?” with a resolute no30. One could interpret thisas an attempt to prevent another period of attritional economic warfare such as bothcountries had experienced in the First World War. However, given the context of Lösch’sand the institute’s other work, it is more likely that he felt an obligation to deliver appliedscience of the highest quality and that he did not want Germany to lose the war. In hisfirst report in March 1940, Lösch had argued that it was impossible for the German navyto disrupt British arms manufacturing by cutting it off from imports. This seems to havebeen the only report in which the institute’s director, Andreas Predöhl, intervened forpolitical reasons. A paragraph was added, claiming a crucial lack of American suppliesfor Britain. In all later reports, Lösch was allowed to speak truth to power, since theWehrmacht valued honest assessments and analyses of the highest scientific standards.In early 1941, Lösch consulted with the Foreign Office (Auswärtiges Amt) and ne-gotiated two orders. The first consisted of brief analyses of weaknesses in Americanshipbuilding, aircraft construction, and machine manufacturing. This information wasintended to be used for propaganda purposes31. The second assignment had a similarpurpose. Lösch’s group was to analyze British trade politics and to highlight everythingthat was deemed “unpleasant” for its trading partners32. The resulting report containeda narrative of how Britain had supposedly betrayed its free trade ideals, had already27“1933 I sensed: Hitler means war. 1935 it became clear to me which side the mighty USA wouldjoin.” Lösch to Fehling, December 1940. Riegger 1971: 103. See also Lösch’s diary entry 24 September1938.28Predöhl: An alle Dienststellen!, 13 January and 24 December 1940. Archive of the Zentralbibliothekfür Wirtschaftswissenschaften in Kiel (ZBW), 470: 102, 14729Predöhl to Reichserziehungsministerium, 20 November 1943. Bundesarchiv Berlin, R 4901/14814:315. Lösch considered himself to have been the most industrious employee at the Kiel Institute. Cf diaryentry in January 1945 Riegger (1971, p. 115).30Lösch: Die englische Nahrungsmittelversorgung, July 1940. Archive of the ZBW, E 118: 37–3831Lösch estate, box XIV and folder “Verschiedenes“32Wilmanns (Auswärtiges Amt) to Predöhl, 7 January 1941. Lösch estate, box XIVREGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 202326 G. Takelost its status as a world power, and was now fighting for a lost cause (Lösch 1941, p.338-340). The Foreign Office considered the report to be “excellent”33, agreed to itspublication in the institute’s journal Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv in September 1941, andrequested 500 copies which it distributed abroad.This publication has to be seen in the context of two earlier articles in spring of 1940,in which Lösch had hailed German successes in disrupting British trade and in whichhe had labelled the combined wars of aggression against Denmark and Norway as “boldGerman endeavors” (Lösch 1940a,c). Compared to other German propaganda, this seemsrather mild. However, that propaganda was a collaborative effort. It was agreed withthe Foreign Office that Lösch’s job should not be to ignite hatred against the British,but specifically to help convince conservative Germans and members of the elites of othercountries that Germany was definitely going to win the war against Britain and that thelatter did not have anything to offer economically to its (potential) allies34. 
Lösch seemsto have had no trouble either with the wording of these articles or with their purpose.In 1943 he reassured himself by writing in his diary: “I have never published anythingthat I did not find to be true after careful analysis”35.Particularly noteworthy among the later research projects is a four-part report onthe human resources of the USA. In 1943, the Wehrmacht and a newly establishedPlanning Office within the Ministry for Armament wanted to assess the military potentialof Germany’s main enemies in order to evaluate whether the war could still be won(Fremdling 2016, p. 271-283). Lösch’s research group concluded that American industrialproductivity alone was more than twice as high as Germany’s. It can be assumed thatLösch hoped that by highlighting the hopelessness of the situation he might help toconvince the German leadership to seek peace, a task which the director of said PlanningOffice also tried to achieve (Müller 1999, p. 124). Yet, this was quite näıve, consideringthe decision-making processes within the Nazi regime. All Lösch achieved was to givevaluable information to the middle management of the German war machine.5 Spatial Research and GenocidesHighly engaged in consultancy activities for the military and various ministries, Löschoften complained that he did not find enough time to conduct independent research.Among the topics he managed to tackle was a spatial theory of currency which waspublished posthumously (Lösch 1949, cf. Bieri 2020). He also wanted to build on hisopus magnum and was keen to publish a second edition of his economics of location(Lösch 1944). On his own accord, he contacted high ranking officials such as the abovementioned Muhs, head of the RfR. It was agreed that Lösch should revise his book “witha practical orientation” and discuss “applications in regional planning”36. The RfR wasone of many state agencies within the “organized chaos” of the Nazi regime fighting forinfluence with regards to the spatial planning of the Reich and especially of the newlyconquered territories in eastern Europe (Flachowsky 2010). Lösch’s task was to supplya theoretical framework for ultra-rational approaches. Particularly in 1942 and 1943, heheld close contact with Muhs, a number of his division managers within the RfR, andother scholars such as Walter Christaller whom he cited more frequently than anybodyelse and who impressed him to the upmost degree (Lösch 1944, Todt 2014). They inturn were managing the process of combining such scientific theories with Nazi ideologyin order to put both to practical use (Trezib 2014).Lösch was well informed about the specific plans on what was to be done in theconquered areas. For example, he praised a design for the area around the Polish city ofKutno, which was published by Konrad Meyer’s Planning Office of Heinrich Himmler’sReich Commissariat for the Consolidation of German Nationhood (Lösch 1944, p. 93).Himmler’s and Meyer’s vision, the “general plan for the east”, presupposed genocides onnations such as Poles and Russians and on religious groups such as Jews (Werner 2022,33Wilmanns (Auswärtiges Amt) to Predöhl, 7 May 1941. Lösch estate, folder “Verschiedenes“34Wilmanns (Auswärtiges Amt) to Predöhl, 7 January 1941. Lösch estate, box XIV35Lösch: diary entry in 1943. Riegger (1971, p. 110)36Köster to Lösch, 3 July 1942. Online Lösch Archive: 256REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023G. Take 27p. 147-149). This genocidal vision is clearly visible in the detailed projects. Lösch knewthat the Nazi regime had almost no interest in his ultra-rational concepts with regards toGermany or Northern and Western Europe with their “Aryan” populations, but only inits dealings with the supposedly racially inferior people in the east who were to be massmurdered. Tellingly, the head of an economics research department in Cracow wrote ina review of Lösch’s book that it was of high value, because the conquered areas in theeast should be considered “almost a tabula rasa”, a blank slate (Meinhold 1942).Additionally, one has to consider those who organized and executed the evictions,enslavements, and killings. Their motivations varied, but it is without a doubt that asignificant number of those perpetrators were not only driven by hatred or a destructiverage, but also wanted to make a constructive and positive contribution to what KonradMeyer called “the Germanization of new territories, to organize, shape, and developnew spaces and landscapes as a future homeland of Germans” (Meyer 1941). The Naziregime lacked resources and the time to implement most of their plans which wouldhave involved the killing of even more tens of millions of people. However, the mereexistence of concepts of such an ultra-rational economic prosperity and of a “positive”and scientifically substantiated vision of a post-genocidal future contributed to the highlevel of self-motivation on which the complex and collaborative governmental killingapparatus depended.In assessing Lösch’s behavior, one question is key: How much did he know about theatrocities committed in connection with spatial planning? It has to be assumed thathe knew a lot, since the Kiel Institute functioned as an information hub, even beingsupplied with newspapers from neutral and hostile countries by the Gestapo as well asreceiving secret studies such as the one mentioned above by Meyer (Take 2019, p. 365–370). Lösch must have grasped that the political, social, religious, cultural, and economicinstitutions of tens of millions of people were to be destroyed in order to replace themwith new Germanic institutions. He might even have learned the neologism “genocide”which Raphaël Lemkin had coined in the USA (Lemkin 1944), as Lösch’s latest task ashead of a newly formed America-department at the Kiel Institute in 1944/45 involvedreading US newspapers. Those newspapers had also reported on the existence of gaschambers and of the killings of millions of Jews and other “non-Aryan” people37.6 Death and AfterlifeLösch enjoyed the respect he received in Nazi Germany for his scientific achievements,not only from the scientific community, but also from government officials in the fieldof spatial planning38. However, he never attained his life’s ambition of becoming afull university professor since he refused to give the necessary open endorsements of thetotalitarian regime. From his point of view, this step – and not the supposedly a-politicalresearch – would have meant leaving the realm of scientific objectivity and betraying hispolitical beliefs. Over the years, he grew enormously discontent with his situation atKiel, feeling unfree and not allowed to pursue the research projects he would have likedto. Still, he stayed put and carried out all research projects the government demanded ofhim, probably in large part because he was relatively secure at Kiel, whereas most othermen his age had to serve in the army. Regarding his academic aspirations, he waitedfor things to change. Accordingly, when Germany finally lost the war, Lösch felt trulyliberated. He celebrated the end of the Nazi era and immediately started to search forfunding and academic partners in order to initiate the many projects he had mapped outin the years prior. Hence, his contemporaries considered it particularly tragic when hesuddenly died of scarlet fever on 30 May 1945, aged 38. He left behind his wife Marga,whom he had married after a four-year-long engagement in March 1940, immediatelyafter securing the position at Kiel, and a daughter born in June 1944.Immediately after his death, a legend was created which continues to have an effect37Poles Ask U.S. to Seize Nazis. In: New York Times, 10 July 1942. Allies Describe Outrages onJews. In: New York Times, 20 December 194238See his diary, letters and also his collection of 50 pages worth of positive reviews on the first editionof his first volume of The Economics of Location. Lösch estate, box XVREGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 202328 G. Takeuntil today39. Lösch was considered to have been a “steadfast opponent of every tyrannyand oppression” (Zottmann 1971, p. 32), an “incautiously outspoken anti-Nazi“ (Funck2007, p. 408) “who was unwilling to agree to only the slightest compromise with theregime” (Todt 2014, p. 204). This legend had three roots: First, there were Lösch’sdiary entries and the letters he sent to his German and American friends in May 1945, inwhich he described himself as an uncompromising opponent and a martyr. Second werethe American economists, many of them German emigrants, who believed the storiesthat Lösch himself and later his widow had told them about his conduct during WorldWar II. They considered this supposed behavior to correspond to the character they hadgot to know in the 1930s. Third were Lösch’s colleagues at Kiel and in the Germaneconomics community at large who were very keen for a resistance fighter to have beenamongst them. Telling the story of how one of their leading figures stood in fierceopposition to the regime allowed them to frame their own cooperation with civilian andgovernmental organizations and their participation in questionable research programs ina much brighter light. With regards to spatial economics, this applied particularly tothose who belonged to Lösch’s and Christaller’s geographic and technocratic school ofthought and not to the organic and völkisch (ethnic) school (Gutberger 1996) which hadutilized a much higher degree of pseudo-scientific rhetoric and had more political activistsamong their ranks.Today’s perspective on Lösch’s biography depends to a large degree on what timeperiod one focuses on and how much attention one pays to the contexts of his research.On the one hand, he experienced enormous political, social, and economic turbulencesduring the formative years of his life. The son of a single mother simultaneously devel-oped a desire for independence but also for belonging. His religiousness seems to havemorphed into an entrenched technocratic Weltanschauung (worldview) which functionedas a secular religion. In the 1930s, Lösch rejected vital aspects of national socialism,e.g. the abolition of democratic institutions, of the rule of law, of free speech, and itsantisemitism, and expansionism. However, the “Third Reich” also provided ample sup-port for spatial research and enabled it to grow and become a scientific discipline (Münk1993). Until 1939, the conditions were such that Lösch was largely able to avoid com-promising himself. His scientific excellence secured him American funds, he was willingto accept a rather precarious financial position for a significant period of time, and hedid not continue to pursue his dream of becoming a university professor. On the otherhand, Lösch’s decision to return and stay in Germany and to seek a job at the KielInstitute for the World Economy meant that he had to contribute to the German wareffort with his scientific expertise. He told his friends and wrote in his diary that he didso reluctantly. But if one looks at his output, he has to be regarded as the most eagerand able economist of the institute. Moreover, Lösch decided of his own accord to spreadhis economic theories and to work together with Nazi spatial planners. He was attractedto the ample opportunities that the genocides in Central and Eastern Europe opened upand made significant steps to engage in the ultra-rational economic rebuilding which wasto follow in accordance with brutal Germanization.Lösch surely knew less about the crimes committed by Nazi Germany than we now do.But given his frequent interactions with many civilian and military government officialsin Berlin and elsewhere and as he was himself working at an information hub, Löschcertainly knew more about current events in Germany and in the occupied territoriesthan most Germans at the time. Crucially, alternative ways of behavior were open tohim. At the very least, he could have contributed less to the German war machineand to the inhuman spatial planning – without running any risk of suffering negativeconsequences. By reflecting on Lösch’s complex character and biography, we can learnmuch about what makes dictatorships or authoritarian and even totalitarian regimesattractive for scientists and about how easy it is to deceive oneself on matters of moralintegrity.39Wilhelm Gülich: Grabansprache (funeral speech), 2 June 1945. Lösch estate, box XIII. Lösch wassupposedly “opposed till the end to the Nazi party.” Message from Marga Lösch to the RockefellerFoundation, undated (probably 1945 or soon after). RAC RF, fellowship recorder cards, RG 10.2,Disciple 5: Humanities Fellows, Germany, August LöschREGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023G. Take 29ReferencesBajohr F, Wildt M (2009) Einleitung. In: Bajohr F, Wildt M (eds), Volksgemeinschaft:neue Forschungen zur Gesellschaft des Nationalsozialismus. Fischer, Frankfurt, 7–23Barnes TJ (2016) A morality tale of two location theorists in germany: Walter christallerand august lösch. In: C M, P G (eds), Hitler’s Geographies: The Spatialities of theThird Reich. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 141–162Baumgart S (2020) Raumforschung zwischen Nationalsozialismus und Demokratie – dasschwierige Erbe der Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft für Raumforschung. ARL, Hannover.https://www.arl-net.de/de/shop/raumforschung-nationalsozialismus.htmlBieri DS (2020) Das Geld im Raum: August Löschs Geldtheorie und ihre Bedeutungfür regionalökonomische Verteilungsfragen. In: Caspari V (ed), Einkommens- undVermögensverteilung in historischer Sicht. Duncker & Humblot, 9-63. CrossRefBröcker J (2014) Deutsche Raumwirtschaftstheoretiker in der Zeit von 1933 bis 1945. In:Trautwein HJ (ed), Die Entwicklung der Raumwirtschaftslehre von ihren Anfängen bisin die Gegenwart. Duncker & Humblot, 207-238. CrossRefFlachowsky S (2010) Werkzeug der deutschen Kriegsführung: Die Forschungspolitik derdeutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft und des Reichsforschungsrates zwischen 1920 und1945. In: Orth K, Oberkrome W (eds), Die Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 1920-1970: Forschungsförderung im Spannungsfeld von Wissenschaft und Politik. Steiner,Stuttgart, 53–69. CrossRefFremdling R (2016) Wirtschaftsstatistik 1933-1945. In: Ritschl A (ed), Das Reichs-wirtschaftsministerium in der NS-Zeit. Wirtschaftsordnung und Verbrechenskomplex.Oldenbourg, Berlin, 233–318. CrossRefFunck RH (2007) Concluding remarks. In: Blum U, Funck R, Kowalski H, S J, KuklinskiA, Rothengatter W (eds), Space – structure – economy: A tribute to August Lösch.Nomos, Baden-Baden, 407–412. CrossRefGutberger J (1996) Volk, Raum und Sozialstruktur: Sozialstruktur- und Sozialraum-forschung im ”Dritten Reich”. Beiträge zur Geschichte der Soziologie. Lit, ViennaHerbert U (2016) Das Dritte Reich: Geschichte einer Diktatur. Beck, München. CrossRefKegler KR (2015) Deutsche Raumplanung. Das Modell der “zentralen Orte” zwischenNS-Staat und Bundesrepublik. Schöningh, Paderborn. CrossRefKeynes JM (1936) The general theory of employment interest and money. Macmillan,London. CrossRefLemkin R (1944) Axis Rule in Occupied Europe: Laws of Occupation – Analysis ofGovernment – Proposals for Redress. Carnegie, Washington D.CLösch A (1930) Eine Auseinandersetzung über das Transferproblem. Schmollers Jahrbuchfür Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft im Deutschen Reiche 54: 1093–1106Lösch A (1932) Was ist vom Geburtenrückgang zu halten? 2 volumes. Self published,HeidenheimLösch A (1933) Review of: Deutscher Lebensraum (Blätter für deutsche Raum- undBevölkerungspolitik Heft 1 u. 2). Schmollers Jahrbuch 57: 157–158Lösch A (1940a) Die neue Kontinentalsperre. Wirtschaftsdienst 25: 461Lösch A (1940b) Die räumliche Ordnung der Wirtschaft. Eine Untersuchung über Stan-dort, Wirtschaftsgebiete und internationalen Handel. Fischer, JenaLösch A (1940c) Verschärfte Gegenblockade. Wirtschaftsdienst 25: 333REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 202330 G. TakeLösch A (1941) Die neuen Methoden der englischen Handelspolitik. WeltwirtschaftlichesArchiv 54: 312–348Lösch A (1944) Die räumliche Ordnung der Wirtschaft (2nd ed.). Fischer, JenaLösch A (1949) Theorie der Währung. Ein Fragment. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 62:35–88Lösch A (1954) The Economics of Location. Yale University Press, New HavenMeinhold H (1942) Review of Die räumliche Ordnung der 
Wirtschaft. Die Burg 3: 360Meyer K (1941) Zur Einführung. In: Reichskommissar für die Festigung deutschenVolkstums (ed), Planung und Aufbau im Osten. Deutsche Buchhandlung, Berlin, 3Müller RD (1999) Der Manager der Kriegswirtschaft. Hans Kehrl: Ein Unternehmer inder Politik des “Dritten Reiches”. Klartext, EssenMünk D (1993) Die Organisation des Raumes im Nationalsozialismus. Pahl-Rugenstein,BonnNijkamp P (2020) August lösch (1906–1945): Moral sentiments, scholarly rigor. In: PB, Plane D (eds), Great Minds in Regional Science, Footprints of Regional Science.Springer, Cham, 91–101. CrossRefRiegger R (1971) August Lösch in Memoriam. Meuer, HeidenheimTake G (2019) Forschen für den Wirtschaftskrieg. Das Kieler Institut für Weltwirtschaftim Nationalsozialismus. De Gruyter, Berlin. CrossRefTodt H (2014) Die Struktur des Wirtschaftsraumes: Eine vergleichende Betrachtung derKonzeptionen von Walter Christaller und August Lösch. In: Trautwein HM (ed),Die Entwicklung der Raumwirtschaftslehre von ihren Anfängen bis in die Gegenwart.Duncker & Humblot, Berlin, 187–206. CrossRefTrezib JN (2014) Die Theorie der zentralen Orte in Israel und Deutschland. Zur Rezep-tion Walter Christallers im Kontext von Sharonplan und “Generalplan Ost”. DeGruyter, Berlin. CrossRefVenhoff M (2000) Die Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaft für Raumforschung (RAG) und die re-ichsdeutsche Raumplanung seit ihrer Entstehung bis zum Ende des ZweitenWeltkrieges1945. ARL, HannoverWerner O (2022) Wissenschaft “in jedem Gewand”?: von der “Reichsarbeitsgemeinschaftfür Raumforschung” zur “Akademie für Raumforschung und Landesplanung” 1935 bis1955. Wallstein, Göttingen. CrossRefZottmann A (1971) Erinnerungen an August Lösch. In: Riegger R (ed), August Löschin Memoriam. Meuer, Heidenheim, 17–32© 2023 by the authors. Licensee: REGION – The Journal of ERSA, EuropeanRegional Science Association, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. This article is distri-buted under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).REGION : Volume 10, Number 3, 2023