Universal Database for Economic Complexity

Universal Database for Economic ComplexityAurelio Patelli1,2,*, Andrea Zaccaria2,1, and Luciano Pietronero1,31Centro di Ricerca Enrico Fermi, Via Panisperna 89 A, I-00184 Rome, Italy2Istituto dei Sistemi Complessi (ISC) - CNR, UoS Sapienza,P.le A. Moro, 2, I-00185Rome, Italy3Dipartimento di Fisica Università “Sapienza”, P.le A. Moro, 2, I-00185 Rome, Italy*corresponding author: Aurelio Patelli (aurelio.patelli@cref.it)AbstractWe present an integrated database suitable for the investigations of the Economic developmentof countries by using the Economic Fitness and Complexity framework. Firstly, we implementmachine learning techniques to reconstruct the database of Trade of Services and we integrateit with the database of the Trade of the physical Goods, generating a complete view of the In-ternational Trade and denoted the Universal database. Using this data, we derive a statisticallysignificant network of interaction of the Economic activities, where preferred paths of developmentand clusters of High-Tech industries naturally emerge. Finally, we compute the Economic Fitness,an algorithmic assessment of the competitiveness of countries, removing the unexpected misbe-haviour of Economies under-represented by the sole consideration of the Trade of the physicalGoods.IntroductionEconomic Fitness and Complexity [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] (EFC) is a novel conceptual and practical frameworkfor the estimation of the competitiveness of nations and the relatedness between sectors, borrowingconcepts and methods from Statistical Physics and the Complex Systems Science [7]. A key feature ofthe method resides in its bottom-up, data-driven approach, which relies on methods like complex net-works and machine learning to reconstruct and investigate the ecosystem constituted by the economicactors and their activities; moreover, all scenarios are based on empirical observations and certifiablehypotheses. This approach departs from the canonical econometric narrative, where the economic per-formances are usually gauged by monetary metrics, such as the Gross Domestic Production (GDP).Instead, EFC aims to capture the competitiveness of a country, and not its wealth, by introducinga synthetic and non-monetary metric, the Fitness [1], bringing to light new and relevant economicpatterns.A key feature of Economic Fitness and Complexity is its reliance on homogeneous and high-qualitydata from which it effectively extracts information by aiming to achieve a maximal signal-to-noise ratio.In the Big-Data era, the novel and great size of available databases may generate a broad confidence onthe new possibilities offered by large scale analyses, although issues related to the quality of the gathereddata and the specific investigations are sometime underplayed [8]. It is rather intuitive that Big-Datamay present Big-Noise [9], and so a careful selection of the sources must be accomplished at the startingpoint of the research in any data-driven field. The reference database in the classical EFC analysis isthe International Trade database reconciled and regularized by Tacchella and collaborators [10] startingfrom the UN-COMTRADE data. This database covers the external flows of physical Goods betweenthe countries in the World with a very fine level of detail of the classification collecting about 5000product’s codes. EFC is based on the export database for various reasons, both practical, due to its1arXiv:2110.00302v1  [econ.GN]  1 Oct 2021homogeneity and standardization across different countries, and conceptual. The idea is to deduce thecompetitiveness of countries not explicitly looking at their capabilities, but by inferring the presenceof such endowments in a indirect way, that is, by looking at the final outputs, the products that suchcountries are able to export [11]. Not trivially, the GDP predictions obtained by EFC and based onthe Trades indicate a quantitatively better performance compared to the best conventional economicmodels [10] and with a much lower data requirement.Unfortunately, the Services are not included in the set of available features in the UN-COMTRADEand, albeit available from an IMF database (www.data.imf.org), neither in the usual analyses of EFC,despite a relevant and growing fraction of money flows through the channel of the Services [12]. A firstattempt to complement the Services into the aforementioned analysis was followed by [13], finding thatat a very aggregated scale the Services tend to be more complex with respect to the Goods. However,the authors complain that the high level of aggregation may be the cause of a loss of informationnecessary to accurately separate the Complexity of the Activities and the Fitness of the Countries.With a deeper level of aggregation, the authors in [14] show a more heterogeneous scenario of theComplexity of the Activities, pointing out that complex Services cluster with complex Goods. In theEFC narrative the clustering of a set of Activities is the signal indicating that there is a participationof common intangible capabilities [3], necessary to be competitive in both the domains. However,either manuscripts select a subset of the available economies in the World because the covering of thedatabases implemented in the analysis present many missing features. Indeed, both the referencesconsider only 116 countries, with important missing economies such as China and Great Britain.Recently, the work of Mishra and collaborators [15] shows the importance to aggregate the Servicesand the Goods in a common database especially accounting properly the economic relevance of thedeveloping nations. Saltarelli et al. [16] use the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) to show thatexport mirrors remarkably well domestic production for manufacturing sectors, but this relation fadesaway for service related sectors. All these analyses, however, use a limited number of services sectorsbecause of the high number of missing values present in the original IMF database; a limitation thatthe present work addresses.The analysis endowed by the previous works highlight the purposes of the Services in the correctestimation of the competitiveness of the nations. However, the reference database for the Services, theBalance of Payments and International Investment (BOP) data collected by the International Mone-tary Fund (IMF) [17], presents some weakness and important missing scores, especially in comparisonwith the quality of the Goods database. Strikingly, the actual IMF-BOP classification is unsuitable forthe EFC analysis, presenting an overlapping and convoluted hierarchy of sector. The first core resultof the present paper is the reconciliation of the quality of two databases, the Goods and the Services,obtained by reclassifying the IMF services sectors and reconstructing the missing elements of BOP byusing and comparing different machine learning techniques. The best reconstruction method obtainedis then used to create the so-called Universal database of EFC, aggregating Services and Goods for 160countries and a total of 124 sectors, providing the largest set of common nations and sectors availablefrom both the BOP and the Trade datasets. Finally, the Universal database is used in the EconomicFitness and Complexity analysis, obtaining two conceptual and practical advances: i) a statisticallyvalidated network of universal sectors, that will be of practical use to predict and recommend newsectors of development, and ii) the computation of the Universal fitness, the novel EFC indicator toassess the competitiveness of nations, now including also the services.MethodsThis section introduces the database used in the later analysis, aggregating Goods and Services; inparticular, we will focus on the motivations and the methodologies we adopted for the re-classificationof services and the reconstruction of the missing values.2Goods: the International TradeFollowing the definition of the IMF [17], a Good is a physical item or commodity over which ownershipcan be passed via transaction. Consistently, it is recorded by the customs and available via UN-COMTRADE. Following the standard approach of EFC, the reference database collecting the scores ofthe Goods is the reconciliation of the International Trade database contained in UN-COMTRADE [18].It collects the export flows of classes of physical products between nations. The classification of theproduct follows the Harmonized System revised in 1992 (HS92), consisting of 5040 sectors labelled by6-digits codes at the sub-heading level. The temporal coverage of the database runs from 1996 to 2018,spanning slightly more than two decades, and it is made available for 169 countries corresponding tothe principal economic players in the World.The statistic of the codes at 6-digits does not present a level of details and a statistics comparable tothe orders of magnitude of the data of the Services. It is also worthy to note that the HS classificationvaries in time and in the available years a relevant modification happens in 2007. Perhaps, suchmodification induced a re-balance in some sectors at 6-digits that create a non-uniform transition infew and low complexity codes [19]. Therefore, we aggregate the classification at the closest comparisonto the Services database, being at the 2-digits classification. Note that this choice also mirrors therespective weight in the international trade [12]. Furthermore, the 2-digits classification has 97 codes,but we remove one sector (the code 99, the Commodities not specified according to kind) because itdoes not represent a well defined sector and has a low impact on the overall exports.Services: description and classification issuesAccording the IMF [17], a Service is the result of a production activity, or facilitate the exchangeof Goods, or is a financial asset. Therefore, Services are usually non-separable items and cannot beseparated from their production. The Service database is based on the Balance of Payments andInternational Investment (BOP) data collected by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) [17] 1. TheBOP database offers three measures of Services: the credit, the debit and the net values. In comparisonwith the measure available for the Goods, we select the credit indices, since they correspond to exportedservices. Two closely related classifications are present: the full BOP classification implemented bythe IMF and an alternative alpha-numerical classification reported in their metadata. The full BOPclassification is based on the composite nature of the codes of the Services but it presents a keydrawback for the analytical purposes accounted below. In fact, it is possible that the sum of the sonsof a code have a total value larger that the assigned value of the parent. This misleading situationhappens because the classification may implement different methodologies in order to generate thehierarchy.In order to explain this situation we discuss an example regarding the case of the sons of the‘Transport Services’ (‘STR’ codes) where the dis-aggregation considers both the kind of transportationimplemented or the nature of the transported Goods. For a visual inspection, figure 1 shows the networkof the transport’s codes, highlighting the two dis-aggregation paths in blue and red. Remarkably, onlythe blue codes sum up to the value of their parents. Instead, the red nodes do not sum to the availablevalue of the parents, although it is possible that using the hierarchical tree obtained from the codesdoes not account properly for the red classification.Contrarily, the alternative classification maintains only a single hierarchical structure removing thedouble methodologies, and the quality is corroborated by the fact that the sum of the values of thesons return the value of the parent codes. We want to stress that the scenario of the two methodologiesderives from a misleading interpretation of the indices offered by the IMF and not an error in theirimplementation of the database, since it is possible to reconstruct the correct structure. We presentthe first three main layers of aggregations of the summable classification in figure 2. Among the layers,the first one accounts for the total sum each country produces in a year. The second and third layersare more representative and diverse of the heterogeneous aggregation of the services.1The data has been downloaded the 28th of January 202 from the website www.data.imf.org3TransportSeaPassenger OtherFreightPostal, Courier PassengerOtherOther ModePassenger Other FreightPostal, CourierFreightAirPassenger OtherFreightFigure 1: The network of the transport and its sons divided with the two possible dis-aggregation ofthe codes. Only the blue codes sum up to the value of the parent. The name of the nodes correspondsto the last part of the definition available from the BOP’s metadata and the full definition correspondto the sequential aggregation of the definitions of the parent nodes.SSOCNASTVSOCNARSTVPSMSTVB SMRSTRSMA STRSSTRPC STROT STRASRSOTCMSOTCMTSOTCMM SOTCMCSORLSOPCRSOPCROSOPCRAUSOOBSOOBTTSOOBRDSOOBPMSOINSOINRI SOINPG SOINDSOINAISOGGSSOFISOFIFISM SOFIEXSOCNFigure 2: The tree graph of the relation between the BOP codes following the alternative classification.The colour of the nodes represents the frequency of missing elements found in the raw database withred corresponding to 1 and white corresponding to 0. The green circle indicates the codes consideredin the final construction of the Universal database (see text below).Missing values in Services dataIn the construction of the Universal database we select the codes of table 1, covering with the lowerlevel of aggregation. For the sake of clarity we highlight these codes in figure 2 with a green thickborder, and we refer to the set as the complete set of codes, since with its knowledge it is possible toobtain the full database.The BOP data covers about 197 countries although we select the subset of 160 countries intersectingthe set of countries available for the Goods, and covering basically all the relevant economies in theworld in terms of economic impact. Finally, in terms of temporal resolution, BOP goes back up to1940 with very few sectors in the first years. However, we reconstruct the series starting from 1990because the Universal database is constraint by the presence of also the Goods database, which startsin 1996.Focusing on the temporal distribution of the missing elements, it is clear that the raw database isnot uniform, as shown in figure 3. In the early years of the series there is a larger presence of missingvalues with a decreasing global trend approaching the recent times. In the developed economies thesebehaviours are primarily induced by the complete absence of the first segments of the series for allthe indices. For example, in the case for Austria, no information is available before 2005; regardingBelgium before 2004, and Japan before 2000. Instead, less developed countries present subsets of theindices with missing scores on short to medium temporal windows, while single NaNs are rarer in thedatasets. Hence, in between 2005 and 2015 the raw database offers its better quality, even if the rawversion continues to have a high fraction of missing values.Finally, also the geographical coverage of the raw database is not uniform, as shown in the top mapof figure 5. Many countries have a large fraction of missing values, even if some of them are devel-oped economies. Remarkably, Switzerland, China, Great Britain, and Spain are among the developedcountries with a low quality representation in the raw data. This situation of heavy lack of data and4code layer descriptionBXSOGGS 1 Government Goods and ServicesBXSORL 1 Charges for the Intellectual PropertyBXSR 1 Maintenance and RepairBXSMA 2 Manufacturing Services, Goods for Processing AbroadBXSMR 2 Manufacturing Services, Goods for Processing InsideBXSOTCMT 2 Telecommunications ServicesBXSOTCMM 2 Information ServicesBXSOTCMC 2 Computer ServicesBXSOPCRO 2 Cultural and RecreationalBXSOPCRAU 2 AudiovisualBXSOOBTT 2 Technical, Trade-related, and Other BusinessBXSOOBRD 2 Research and DevelopmentBXSOOBPM 2 ConsultingBXSOINRI 2 ReinsuranceBXSOINPG 2 PensionBXSOIND 2 Direct InsuranceBXSOINAI 2 Auxiliary Insurance ServicesBXSOFIFISM 2 FISIMBXSOFIEX 2 Explicitly Charged and Other Financial ServicesBXSOCNA 2 Construction AbroadBXSOCNAR 2 
Construction InsideBXSTVB 2 Travel BusinessBXSTVP 2 Travel PersonalBXSTRS 2 Sea TransportBXSTRPC 2 Postal and CourierBXSTROT 2 Other Passenger TransportBXSTRA 2 Air TransportTable 1: The list of the 27 codes implemented in the Universal database with their description. Theinitial 2 letters ‘BX’ indicate the credits.heterogeneity calls for a specific intervention to reconstruct the missing elements, which is the subjectof the next section.Reconstruction of the missing ServicesWe implement a reconstruction of the BOP database using different machine learning techniques. Theuse of the alternative classification discussed above allows the derivation of the full hierarchy recon-structing the complete subset of leafs by summing the indices (red-circled indices in figure 2). However,the knowledge of the values of the upper layers of the classification are used in the reconstruction be-cause we do not want to change abruptly the relative importance of the nations or of the daughterindices. Moreover, in the following we assume that any not-missing value of the raw database is correct,thus also the entries with zero value are labelled as correct. A very basic and easily interpretable recon-struction technique is given by the linear interpolation of the temporal series in the forward direction,i.e. generating the elements for which there exists some previous information. Therefore, the linearinterpolation is assumed as the reference method, giving relatively good results despite the simplicityof the method. Successively, we consider two families of methodologies: the Random Forest class andthe Nearest-Neighbour imputations [20] class.The Random Forest consists in an ensemble of decision trees [21] trained to optimize the entropyof the reconstruction. Rather, a decision tree is a single and non-overlapping subdivision of the spaceof the features, i.e. the values of the series, into distinct regions following a hierarchical ordering ofthe feature-selection with a tree structure [22]. Since the splits of the tree are randomly chosen, it ispossible to derive many different decision trees forming a statistical ensemble. Using the ensemble of5Figure 3: Proportion of missing elements in the complete set of indices of the BOP database as afunction of the years in the layers of the raw database (160 countries). The lines with the shade ofblue correspond to the different layers of the raw database while the red and dark red lines correspondto the complete set in the raw (red) and reconstructed (dark red) cases.trees it is possible to estimate each missing feature of the input database (here the Services) based onthe behaviour of the other entries for which those features are specified. This method is applied onthe complete set of series aggregating the entries in time and space (years and nations), the so-calledTemporal Random Forest [23], such that the information from similar economies is taken into account.In reference [23], this method is found to be superior in terms of the quality of reconstruction withrespect to the separate reconstruction of each country series.The latter method we realize, the k-Nearest-Neighbour (kNN), consists in the generation of themissing features with a weighted network average from other features. In detail, the network ofsimilitude between the economies, from the prior knowledge of the indices in the upper layers, is builtunder the assumptions that the reconstruction does not strongly modify the relative importance ofthe nations. Accordingly, the kNN imputer [24] links the first K nearest-neighbours elements from theavailable information on the upper layer. The resulting network is then applied for the selection of thenearest elements considered in the weighted reconstruction of the missing values. Finally, the weightis defined as the Euclidean feature-distance in the original space between the selected entries.We test the quality of the reconstructions on a test-set of the database composed by countries andindices for which all the entries are specified. On this dataset we generate random samples setting somefeature as missing, and we generate 100 samples of this process. For each replica we label as missing atrandom, and we compute the statistics on the reconstruction techniques described above. The qualityof the reconstructions are finally evaluated by the computation of the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)between the reconstructed and the truth values. As shown by the left panel of figure 4, the interpolationmethod down-perform the MAE of the Temporal Random Forest, but the best achievement is obtainedby using the kNN network built with only a few of neighbours.Therefore, in order to reconstruct the database we will use in the following analyses we implementthe kNN reconstruction technique with K = 5 2 neighbours on the complete set of indices describedin the previous section. Figure 5 shows World maps drawing the colours of the countries in terms of2We may expect that size effects require a larger K and the difference in MAE between 4 and 5 in not appreciable.6Figure 4: The Mean Absolute Error of layer of the proposed reconstruction techniques a s function ofthe number of Nearest-neighbours K.the fraction of missing elements in the raw (upper) and reconstructed (lower) databases and allowinga visual representation of the quality of the reconstruction. Finally, the reconstructed set, truncatedbetween 1996 and 2018, is then aggregated to the 2-digits UN-COMTRADE data in the so-calledreconstructed Universal database.The Economic Fitness and Complexity input matricesThe various Economic Complexity measures are computed starting from quantities derived from theexport data. The raw export volumes are not directly used essentially for two reasons: i) they triviallydepend on both the sizes of the sector and the country and ii) they do not provide an assessment of thecompetitiveness of the given country in exporting a product. In order to overcome these limitations,the Revealed Comparative Advantage (RCA), introduced by Balassa [25], is commonly used in theliterature. In formula, the RCA of country c in activity a is computed as:RCAc,a =Ec,a/∑a Ec,a∑c Ec,a/∑c,a Ec,a(1)where Ec,a is the value of the Product or Service sector a (what we generically call an activity), inconstant US dollars, exported by country c. Note that this formulation permits to identify a naturalthreshold of 1 to determine whether c exports a in a competitive way or not with respect to what theglobal set does. As a consequence, we can define the binary matrix M whose element Mc,a is equal to1 if RCAc,a ≥ 1, and it is equal to 0 otherwise.We also define the Marked Share (MS) matrix element as:MSc,a = Ec,a/∑cEc,a (2)that is an assessment of the importance of country c in the global trade of a. Note that in this case nonatural threshold is available, and a residual correlation with the size of the country is usually present.Hence, we will call the Fitness based on MS the Extensive Fitness, recalling the concept of extensive7Figure 5: Maps of the World where the colour correspond to the density of missing elements in thecomplete set of indices of the database of the Services. The top map shows the density in the raw datawhile the bottom map shows the density in the reconstructed data.and intensive quantities in statistical physics, and we may indicate the standard computations basedon the binary RCA as intensive for comparison.Both the series of the Market Share and of the binary RCA present their sources of noise anddifferent techniques can be implemented in order to reduce their negative effect. However, for thesake of simplicity and since the data at the aggregated level of 2-digits usually consider large volumes,8in both the series of Market Share and RCA we apply a simple exponential smoothing with half-lifeof 3 years. The use of the exponential smoothing allows the reduction of the noise has the positiveside effect of maintaining a persistence of a few years in the temporal series, without the use of morecomplex Machine Learning Models.ResultsThe Economic Fitness and Complexity framework can be divided in two lines of research. The first oneaims at assessing the Relatedness between sectors and sectors, and countries and sectors [26]. Usually,the output is a network of products, such as the Product Space [27] or the Taxonomy Network [28].Actually, in this paper we will compute the Product Progression Network [14], based on the AssistMatrix validation framework introduced in [29]. With respect to other approaches, the one used herehas two advantages: i) the time evolution is explicitly taken into account, permitting the constructionof a directed network of sectors, and ii) each link is statistically validated by comparing its weightagainst a distribution arising from a suitable null model. The second line of research in EconomicFitness and Complexity consists in an assessment of the global competitiveness of a country, based onthe idea that sophisticated capabilities are needed to export complex products. One example is theEconomic Complexity Index [27]. Instead, in the present work we use the Fitness measure introducedin [1], which has a number of advantages from both a practical and a theoretical points of view. Fora broad discussion on these arguments we direct the reader to the relevant literature [30, 31, 32, 33];herein we only emphasize the predictive power of the Fitness approach. As shown in [10], it outperformsthe IMF in forecasting the GDP time evolution.Goods and Services interactionA measure of the interaction between two activities can be obtained considering their co-occurrences,that is counting how often such couple of activities is present in the baskets of different nations. Inorder to avoid the size effect induced by the nested nature of the system, where developed countriesare competitive in many activities, and some activities are by far more widespread than other, onehas to properly normalize the simple co-occurrences. Following [29], we compute the probability theinformation flows from one activity to the other along the shortest paths. The resulting weightednetwork, projecting the original bipartite structure into the activity layer, is the Assist MatrixBa,a′(t,∆) =∑cMca(t)da(t)Mca′(t + ∆)uc(t + ∆). (3)Note that the time evolution of M is explicitly taken into account, so one has a different network ofactivities for each t and ∆. Moreover, this network is almost fully connected, and the presence ofspurious links prevents also simple tasks such as a clear visualization of the connectivity. In order tofilter the links maintaining only the relevant ones, we have to statistically validate each link against asuitable null model.The implementation of the statistical validation of the network of interaction is pursued by con-sidering an ensemble of random networks preserving few suitable macroscopic constraints [34]. Wegenerate the ensemble of randomized bipartite networks related to the empirical case, and we usethem in the generation of the ensemble of the random Assist Matrix at fixed (t,∆). Thus, we seizeonly those links in the empirical Assist Matrix that are above a percentile threshold, resulting in thestatistically validated matrix at fixed (t,∆). Successively, we validate only those links that are statis-tically significant on all the available years t at a fixed ∆, aiming to reduce the false inference problem.Therefore, we have the topological graph keeping only the links that are found relevant on all thetemporal series analyzed. Finally, we consider the presence of auto-correlation on the temporal seriesof the raw signal, and therefore we collapse a range the graphs into a single network where each linkhas a weight equal to the number of times it has been validated at different ∆.9In detail, in the present work the random ensemble considered for the validation of the networkof interaction is the Bipartite Configuration Model [35, 36] (BiCM). The BiCM randomizes all theinformation available but the degrees of the nodes, a.k.a. the ubiquity and the diversification, whichare kept constant (on average). Indeed, activities with a larger ubiquity have higher probability to beproduced by a random country by chance and the BiCM contemplate this information. For the linkselection we apply a small percentile threshold of 95%, compared to other cases in literature, becausewe require such level of statistical relevance along all the time series.Toys, games and sports requisites Clothing accessories, not knitted Pharmaceutical products FurnitureClothing accessoriesOrganic chemicalsArms and ammunit ion FabricsInorganic chemicalsManufacturing Services, Goods for Processing Abroad Musical instrumentsTextile fabricsMineral fuelsManufacturing Services, Goods for Processing Inside ClocksWoven FabricsOresConstruction InsideOptical instrumentsCarpetsEarths materialsConstruction AbroadShipsWaddingTobaccoExplicitly Charged and Other Financial Services AircraftMan-made staple fibres Food industriesFISIMVehiclesMan-made filamentsBeveragesGovernment Goods and Services RailwayVegetable textile fibres Miscellaneous edible preparations Auxiliary Insurance Services Electrical machineryCottonPreparations of vegetables Direct InsuranceNuclear reactors, boilers WoolPreparations of cereals PensionMetal miscellaneousSilkCocoaReinsuranceMetal CutleryPrinted booksSugarsConsultingMetals nesPaperMeat-Fish preparations Research and Development TinPulp of woodAnimal or vegetable fats Technical, Trade-related, and Other Business ZincPlaiting materialsVegetable plaiting materials AudiovisualLeadCorkLacCultural and Recreational AluminiumWoodOil seedsCharges for the Intellectual Property NickelFurskinsMalt, wheatComputer ServicesCopperLeatherCerealsInformation ServicesIron articlesRaw hidesCoffee, teaTelecommunications Services Iron and steelRubberFruit and nutsMaintenance and Repair PearlsPlasticsVegetables edibleAir TransportGlassChemical productsTreesOther Passenger Transport Ceramic productsPhoto-cinematographic goods Animal originated products Postal and CourierStone materialsExplosivesEdible products animal origin Sea TransportFeathersAlbuminoidal substances FishTravel BusinessUmbrellasSoap, LubricatingMeatTravel PersonalHeadgearPerfumery, CosmeticAnimals; liveArt and AntiquesFootwearPigmentsMiscellaneous manufactured articles TextilesFertilizersFigure 6: The statistically validated network of sectors. Goods are in pink, while Services are inlight blue. The width of the links is proportional to the number of statistically validated time intervals.The collected network spans 10 years of possible time delays (∆ ∈ [0, 10]) in order to keep trackof the autocorrelation. Figure 6 shows the network following the HS classification. On the bottomright, a High-Tech cluster contains both high Complexity Goods and Services. Going counter-clockwise,immediately above we find all the Heavy Industries and then Textile related sectors. Few other clusterscollects the mineral Raw Materials and the Vegetable and the living Materials. These sectors show alower degree of connectivity, indicating that countries specialized in these sectors rarely jump to morecomplex industries. The Services are not strongly dispersed but are not forming a single block of nodes.Note that High-Tech related Services, those associated to royalties and R&D, are strongly connectedwith the high Complexity sectors. Regarding only the Service, solely the group of transport nodescreate a cluster per se. Finally, the statistical nature of the construction of the network allows that fewnodes are not connected to any elements because their links are not found to be statistically relevant.A lower percentile threshold may connect them at the price that the final network of interaction willbe less statistically significant with more likely erroneous inferences.10Economic Fitness and ComplexityThe Fitness and Complexity algorithm [1, 3, 37] aims at assessing the competitiveness, or Fitness, of acountry, and the sophistication or Complexity of products using a set of coupled equations. The ideais the following. Each country is characterized by its endowments, or capabilities, which represent itssocial, cultural, and technological structure [38]. These capabilities are expressed in what a countryproduces and exports, so sectors (physical Goods and 
Services) and their Complexities are linked tothe Fitness of each country; in particular, the Complexity of a sector increases with the number andthe quality of the capabilities needed in order to be competitive in it, and the Fitness is a measureof the Complexity and the number of the competitively exported sectors. In order to make this lineof reasoning more quantitative, we start by considering the global structure of the matrix M definedabove. Once countries and products are suitably arranged, the matrix M is triangular, or nested [39],showing that developed countries have diversified exports, while less developed countries export fewer,lower Complexity products, and these products are actually the ones exported by all countries. Inorder to leverage on this structure to extract information about countries’ competitiveness and sectors’Complexity, Tacchella et al. [1] proposed the following set of non-linear, coupled equationsF̃(n)c =∑a McaQ(n−1)aQ̃(n)a =1∑c Mca1F(n)cF(n)c =F̃(n)c< F̃(n)c >cQ(n)a =Q̃(n)a< Q̃(n)a >a. (4)Here < · >x denotes the arithmetic mean with respect to the possible values assumed by the variabledependent on x, with initial condition:∑aQ(0)a = 1 ∀ a. (5)The iteration of the coupled equations leads to a single fixed point that does not depend on theinitial conditions [1, 3, 37]. The fixed point defines the non-monetary metrics quantifying the FitnessFc and the Complexity Qa. The convergence properties of equations (4) are not trivial and have beenextensively studied by Pugliese et al. [37]. The coupled equations in (4) relies only on one input, thematrix M stating which countries are competitive in which sectors. Usually, the matrix is representedby the binary RCA, although also the Market Shares can be entered in equation (4), return theExtensive Fitness [1, 14]. The immediate consequence of this choice is a higher correlation with thesize of the country, as expressed for instance by its GDP. In Figure 7 we compare the results of theFitness algorithm when different input matrices are used. On the left we compare the Universal (i.e.,considering Goods and Services) Extensive (i.e., the Market Shares matrix MS is used) Fitness, onthe x-axis, with the Extensive Fitness computed at 6-digits, that is, considering only the Goods andthe lower available level of aggregation, containing about 4500 different codes. On the right, instead,we show the intensive counterpart, that uses as input the binary RCA. By visually inspecting thefigure one can notice various properties. First, a rather good correlation is present, highlighting thatthe overall economical results based on the Fitness metrics are robust when Services are integratedand the sectors are aggregated from the 6 to 2 digits levels. More importantly, the positive effectof specializing in high Complexity Services clearly emerges. Countries such as Great Britain (GBR)and Germany (DEU) provide two examples of Services or manufacturing driven countries, as correctlyreflected by the Fitness indicator. As shown in references [10, 40], the Fitness metrics can be used toforecast the GDP variations with a relatively long time interval and high accuracy. Hence, in this workwe address a basic analysis in which we consider the time delayed cross-correlation between the Fitnessmeasures and the respective GDP values with the aim to evaluate if the aggregation of the Servicespossibly introduce more signal or more noise in the forecasting. In Figure 8, on the left, we plot thecorrelation between the intensive Fitness and the GDP per capita (GDP pc). One can easily see that11Figure 7: 6d vs 2d and with/without services comparison. One the left, the effect on theExtensive Fitness values of integrating services and aggregating into 2 digit sectors. On the right, thesame analysis performed using the intensive Fitness. In both cases a good correlation is present, andthe major deviations are given by services and good driven Economies. The dashed lines indicate theleast square regression fit with a power law shape, while the colour scheme highlight the countriesgaining ranking positions in ref and losing position in blue.Figure 8: Extensive fitness as GDP precursor. Average correlations (Pearson coefficient) amongthe GDP and Fitness series with temporal lag. The left panel has the intensive measures while theright panel has the extensive ones. The filled regions is the region in between the 25% and the 75%quantile from the application of the bootstrap. The diagonal line is reported for the visualization ofthe variation of the strength relations.lines are essentially flat, indicating that, albeit correlated, there is no clear time direction from Fitnessto GDP pc or vice-versa for either measure. Interestingly, this is the case of also the 6-digits Fitnessusually implemented in the GDP analysis. On the right, we show the extensive counterpart: theFitness computed using the Market Shares and the total GDP, not normalized using the population.The Extensive Fitness, and in particular the Universal Extensive Fitness, that contains both physicalGoods and Services, is clearly able to predict the GDP with a time delay of up to 20 years, that howeveris of the order of the maximal extension of our data. Note that we are using the term prediction inthe Economic sense, i.e. this not an out of sample forecast but a time delayed correlation. In thissense, we can safety say that the Universal Extensive Fitness is able to statistically anticipate, or is aprecursor of the total GDP. However, the converse is not completely true: although there is a signal ofcorrelation, the GDP has a lower predictive power and the Fitness is somehow harder to be anticipated.12Finally, we show in figure 9 the time evolution of the Complexity rankings for both Goods (in red) andFigure 9: The series of the ordering of the Universal Sectors. The red colors refer to the physicalGoods while the blue colors indicates the Services.Services (in blue). Even if some noise is present, the rankings clearly follows the layman’s intuition ofwhich sector may be sophisticated and which is not. In the high Complexity rankings we find servicessuch as R&D and royalties, and manufacturing sectors such as nuclear reactors, optical instruments,and aircraft. Instead, low Complexity products correctly correspond to lower capabilities requirementssuch as Agrifood sectors. Note that some top code such as ’Games, sport requisites’ includes alsoaccessories and sophisticated products necessary for any kind of sport and competition, while otherscodes like Umbrellas are boosted by the fact that more than 83% of their Trade is performed by China.DiscussionAll Economic Complexity measures are based on countries-activities bipartite networks, where theword activity usually indicates a physical product. Nonetheless, a fast growing fraction of both theInternational Trades and local economies is based on Services. Recent attempts tried to integrate thestandard UN-COMTRADE database of physical Goods with the IMF BOP database collecting theService data [13, 14, 15]. However, two problems prevented the necessary achievements to reach a levelof data control and sanitation comparable to the Goods-only data. Firstly, the IMF classification israther convoluted and, as it is, not suitable for a direct application into the EC framework, and themain issue is related to the structure of the classification tree. Secondly, the significant presence of13missing values at different scales of aggregation prevents the realization of a satisfactory level of detailof the classification, forcing the use of various gimmicks to arrange the data. For instance, Stojkoski etal. [13] modified the original Fitness and Complexity algorithm to make it converge. In this work weaddress and propose a solution to both these problems by selecting, on one hand, a self-consistent andnot overlapping Service classification and, on the other hand, filling the missing values with a suitablemachine learning approach. In particular, we compare and test different sanitation strategies and findthat a kNN approach gives the lowest reconstruction error.Once the reconstruction is performed, the Universal dataset is available integrated, Goods andServices. Hence, we applied the new dataset in the Economic Fitness and Complexity framework.In particular, we build a statistically validated network of Universal sectors bringing to light theinteraction among them. By construction the interaction is directed because the time evolution ofthe input matrices is explicitly taken into account.The resulting network is filtered by validating theinteraction with the use of an ensemble of random matrices preserving the degree sequences of nationsand activities. Thus, only the statistically significant connections are maintained. Meaningful patternsindicate that there exist a deep interrelation between High-Tech manufacturing and complex Services,and there is a partial isolation of the agrifood sector.Successively, we computed the Fitness of countries and the Complexity of universal sectors, both inthe extensive and the intensive fashions. The importance of Services once again emerges, as previousmeasures of Fitness clearly underestimate the competitiveness of countries such as the United Kingdom.Finally, we considered the so-called Extensive Fitness that, being computed starting from the MarketShares, is more connected with the cumulative importance of the country at the International level.We show that the Extensive Universal Fitness is a precursor of the GDP, in the statistical sense thatit is highly correlated with the GDP when a time delay is accounted. In particular, this correlationincreases with time, showing that the Universal Extensive Fitness anticipates the GDP, significantlymore than the contrary. This work and most importantly the Universal database, opens up a numberof possible lines of research. Firstly, even if the results of this paper are focused on the EconomicFitness and Complexity framework, the reconstruction of the Services database and its integrationwith the Goods data is of general interest and can be also used with other macroeconomic purposes.Secondly, the Universal Fitness can be used to build GDP and GDPpc forecasts using the SelectivePredictability Scheme, as done in [40, 10]. We expect that the inclusion of Services will improve thepredictive performance of this approach. Finally, the Universal Progression Network, with or withoutthe support of machine learning approaches, can be used to predict the future activation of sectorsnow absent in the export basket of countries.Data AvailabilityThe datasets generated and analysed during the current study are available in the Universal databaserepository, https://efcdata.cref.it/.Usage NotesThe raw database of the Services is the Balance of Payments, collected by the International Mon-etary Fund (IMF), which is free of charge, as described in the terms of the Copyright and Usage(https://www.imf.org/external/terms.htm). All the database and the files containing the results ofthe Fitness and Complexity algorithm are available in the csv (comma-separated-values) format ofUnicode (UTF-8) string format. The format of the file requires that the first column contains the rowindexes while the first row contains the column indexes. The choice of the format of the databaseallows the implementation using various open-source codes and platform, as well as Office suites (andopen or free versions).14Code availabilityThe repository contains the Jupyter notebooks written in Python 3 necessary to reproduce the recon-struction and the Fitness and Complexity algorithm.AcknowledgementsWe gratefully acknowledge funding received from the Joint Research Centre of Seville (grant number938036-2019 IT).References[1] A. Tacchella, M. Cristelli, G. Caldarelli, A. Gabrielli, and L. Pietronero. A new metrics forcountries’ fitness and products complexity. Scientific Reports, 2, 2012.[2] A. Tacchella, M. Cristelli, G. Caldarelli, A. Gabrielli, and L. Pietronero. Economic complexity:conceptual grounding of a new metrics for global competitiveness. Journal of Economic Dynamicsand Control, 37, 2013.[3] M. Cristelli, A. Gabrielli, A. Tacchella, G. Caldarelli, and L. Pietronero. Measuring the intangibles:A metrics for the economic complexity of countries and products. PloS One, 8, 2013.[4] G. Caldarelli, M. Cristelli, A. Gabrielli, L. Pietronero, A. Scala, and A. Tacchella. A networkanalysis of countries’ export flows: firm grounds for the building blocks of the economy. PloSOne, 7, 2012.[5] Andrea Zaccaria, Matthieu Cristelli, Roland Kupers, Andrea Tacchella, and Luciano Pietronero.A case study for a new metrics for economic complexity: The netherlands. Journal of EconomicInteraction and Coordination, 11(1):151–169, 2016.[6] A. Sbardella, E. Pugliese, A. Zaccaria, and P. Scaramozzino. The role of complex analysis inmodelling economic growth. Entropy, 20:11, 2018.[7] L. Pietronero. Complexity ideas from condensed matter and statistical physics. Europhysics News,39:6, 2008.[8] H. Hosni and A. Vulpiani. Forecasting in light of big data. Philosophy & Technology, 31(4):557–569, 2018.[9] N. Silver. The signal and the noise: the art and science of prediction. Penguin UK, 2012.[10] A. Tacchella, D. Mazzilli, and L. Pietronero. A dynamical systems approach to gross domesticproduct forecasting. Nature Physics, 14:861–865, 2018.[11] Ricardo Hausmann, Jason Hwang, and Dani Rodrik. What you export matters. Journal ofeconomic growth, 12(1):1–25, 2007.[12] Prakash Loungani, Saurabh Mishra, Chris Papageorgiou, Ke Wang, et al. World trade in services;evidence from a new dataset. Technical report, International Monetary Fund, 2017.[13] Viktor Stojkoski, Zoran Utkovski, and Ljupco Kocarev. The impact of services on economiccomplexity: Service sophistication as route for economic growth. PLoS ONE, 11(8):1–29, 2016.[14] A. Zaccaria, S. Mishra, M. Z. Cader, and L. Pietronero. Integrating services in the economic fitnessapproach. Technical report, WPS8485; The WorldBank: Washington, DC, USA,2018, 2018.15[15] Saurabh Mishra, Ishani Tewari, and Siavash Toosi. Economic complexity and the globalization ofservices. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 53:267–280, 2020.[16] Francesco Saltarelli, Valeria Cimini, Andrea Tacchella, Andrea Zaccaria, and Matthieu Cristelli.Is export a probe for domestic production? Frontiers in Physics, 8:180, 2020.[17] IMF. Balance of payments and international investment.[18] United Nations. https://comtrade.un.org/, 2020.[19] A. Patelli, L. Napolitano, A. Zaccaria, G. Cimini, A. Gabrielli, and L. Pietronero. Jrc final report:Economic Fitness and Complexity: an inquiry into the innovation and competitiveness of worldregions, 2021.[20] Gustavo EAPA Batista, Maria Carolina Monard, et al. A study of k-nearest neighbour as animputation method. His, 87(251-260):48, 2002.[21] L. Breiman. Random forest. Machine learning, 45:5–32, 2001.[22] S. R. Safavian and D. Landgrebe. A survey of decision tree classifier methodology. IEEE Trans-actions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 21(3):660–674, 1991.[23] D. Serafini. Causal relationships among infrastructures, growth and economic complexity indexes.Master’s thesis, Physics Department, 2019.[24] Olga Troyanskaya, Michael Cantor, Gavin Sherlock, Pat Brown, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani,David Botstein, and Russ B. Altman. Missing value estimation methods for DNA microarrays .Bioinformatics, 17(6):520–525, 06 2001.[25] B. Balassa. Trade liberalisation and revealed comparative advantage. The manchester school,33(2):99–123, 1965.[26] César A Hidalgo, Pierre-Alexandre Balland, Ron Boschma, Mercedes Delgado, Maryann Feldman,Koen Frenken, Edward Glaeser, Canfei He, Dieter F Kogler, Andrea Morrison, et al. The principleof relatedness. In International conference on complex systems, pages 451–457. Springer, 2018.[27] C. A. Hidalgo and R. Hausmann. The building blocks of economic complexity. PNAS, 106, 2009.[28] A. Zaccaria, M. Cristelli, A. Tacchella, and L. Pietronero. How the taxonomy of products drivesthe economic development of countries. PLoS one, 9(12):1–17, 2014.[29] E. Pugliese, G. Cimini, A. Patelli, A. Zaccaria, L. Pietronero, and A. Gabrielli. Unfolding theinnovation system for the development of countries: co-evolution of science,
 technology and pro-duction. Scientific Reports, 9, 2017.[30] S. Albeaik, M. Kaltenberg, M. Alsaleh, and C. A. Hidalgo. Improving the economic complexityindex, 2017.[31] A. Gabrielli, M. Cristelli, D. Mazzilli, A. Tacchella, A. Zaccaria, and L. Pietronero. Why we likethe eci+ algorithm, 2018.[32] S. Albeaik, M. Kaltenberg, M. Alsaleh, and C. A. Hidalgo. 729 new measures of economic com-plexity (addendum to improving the economic complexity index), 2017.[33] L. Pietronero, M. Cristelli, A. Gabrielli, D. Mazzilli, E. Pugliese, A. Tacchella, and A. Zaccaria.Economic complexity:" buttarla in caciara" vs a constructive approach, 2017.[34] F. Saracco, M. J. Straka, R. Di Clemente, A. Gabrielli, G. Caldarelli, and T. Squartini. Inferringmonopartite projections of bipartite networks: an entropy-based approach, new j. Phys, 19, 2017.16[35] Tiziano Squartini and Diego Garlaschelli. Analytical maximum-likelihood method to detect pat-terns in real networks. New Journal of Physics, 13(8):083001, aug 2011.[36] F. Saracco, R. Di Clemente, A. Gabrielli, and T. Squartini. Randomizing bipartite networks: thecase of the world trade web. Scientific Reports, 5, 2015.[37] E. Pugliese, A. Zaccaria, and L. Pietronero. On the convergence of the fitness-complexity algo-rithm,. Eur Phys. J. Spec Top, 225:1893, 2016.[38] G. Dosi, R. Nelson, and S. Winter. The nature and dynamics of organizational capabilities. OxfordUniversity Press, 2000.[39] M.S. Mariani, Z.-M. Ren, J. Bascompte, and C. J. Tessone. Nestedness in complex networks:observation, emergence, and implications. Physics Reports, 813, 2019.[40] M. Cristelli, A. Tacchella, M. Cader, K. Roster, and L. Pietronero. On the predictability ofgrowth. Policy Research Working Paper 8117, World Bank Group, 2017.17