Economic Complexity and Human Development

ECONOMICSwww.routledge.coman informa businessDominik HartmannROUTLEDGE STUDIES IN DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICSEconomic Complexity andHuman DevelopmentHow economic diversification andsocial networks affect human agencyand welfareEconomicComplexityandHumanDevelopmentDominikHartmannISBN 978-0-415-85891-5,!7IA4B5-ifijbf!A PDF version of this book is available for free in Open Access at www.taylorfrancis.com. It has been made available under a Creative Commons Atrribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives 4.0 license.This book combines the human development approach with innovation economics to explore the effects that structural economic change has on human development. While economic diversification can provide valuable new social choices and capabilities, it also tends to lead to more complex decision processes and changes to the set of capabilities required by people to self-determine their future. Within this process of structural transformation, social networks are crucial for accessing information and social support, but networks can also be a root cause of exclusion and inequality reproduction. This implies the need to encourage innovation and economic diversification beyond production expansion, focusing on the promo-tion of human agency and social inclusion. This book provides such a modern perspective on development economics, emphasizing the role of social networks, economic diversity and entrepreneur-ship for social welfare. The author discusses how innovation, social networks, economic dynamics and human development are interlinked, and provides several practical examples of social and micro-entrepreneurship in contexts as diverse as Peruvian rural villages and Brazil’s urban areas.The interdisciplinary perspective put forward in this book illustrates theoreti-cal and methodological methods of exploring the complexity of development in a practical and relevant way. It also provides useful information about structural factors which need to be considered by practitioners when designing pro-poor growth policies. Furthermore, the coverage of the core concepts of innovation, networks and development economics, enriched with multiple examples, makes it a valuable resource for scholars and advanced students of modern development economics.Dominik Hartmann is Research Fellow at the University of Hohenheim, Germany and a Postdoctoral Fellow at the MIT Media Lab, USA. His work  examines the complex relationships between innovation, structural economic change and human development.Economic Complexity and Human DevelopmentRoutledge Studies in Development Economics 1   Economic Development in the Middle East Rodney Wilson  2   Monetary and Financial Policies in Developing Countries  Growth and stabilizationAkhtar Hossain and Anis Chowdhury  3   New Directions in Development Economics  Growth, environmental concerns and government in the 1990sEdited by Mats Lundahl and Benno J. Ndulu 4   Financial Liberalization and Investment Kanhaya L. Gupta and Robert Lensink  5   Liberalization in the Developing World Institutional and economic changes in Latin America, Africa and Asia Edited by Alex E. Fernández Jilberto and André Mommen 6   Financial Development and Economic Growth Theory and experiences from developing countries Edited by Niels Hermes and Robert Lensink 7   The South African Economy Macroeconomic prospects for the medium term Finn Tarp and Peter Brixen 8   Public Sector Pay and Adjustment Lessons from five countries Edited by Christopher Colclough 9   Europe and Economic Reform in Africa Structural adjustment and  economic diplomacy Obed O. Mailafia10   Post-apartheid Southern Africa Economic challenges and  policies for the future Edited by Lennart Petersson11   Financial Integration and Development Liberalization and reform in sub-Saharan AfricaErnest Aryeetey and Machiko Nissanke12   Regionalization and Globalization in the Modern World Economy Perspectives on the Third World and transitional economies Edited by Alex E. Fernández Jilberto and André Mommen13   The African Economy Policy, institutions and the future Steve Kayizzi-Mugerwa14   Recovery from Armed Conflict in Developing Countries Edited by Geoff Harris15   Small Enterprises and Economic Development The dynamics of micro and small enterprises Carl Liedholm and Donald  C. Mead16   The World Bank New agendas in a changing world Michelle Miller-Adams17   Development Policy in the Twenty-First Century  Beyond the post-Washington consensus Edited by Ben Fine, Costas Lapavitsas and Jonathan Pincus18   State-Owned Enterprises in the Middle East and North Africa Privatization, performance and reform Edited by Merih Celasun19   Finance and Competitiveness in Developing Countries Edited by José María Fanelli and Rohinton Medhora20   Contemporary Issues in Development Economics Edited by B.N. Ghosh21   Mexico Beyond NAFTA Edited by Martín Puchet Anyul and Lionello F. Punzo22   Economies in Transition A guide to China, Cuba, Mongolia, North Korea and Vietnam at the turn of the twenty-first century Ian Jeffries23   Population, Economic Growth and Agriculture in Less Developed CountriesNadia Cuffaro24   From Crisis to Growth in Africa?Edited by Mats Lundal25   The Macroeconomics of Monetary UnionAn analysis of the CFA franc zone David Fielding26   Endogenous DevelopmentNetworking, innovation, institu-tions and cities Antonio Vasquez-Barquero27   Labour Relations in Development Edited by Alex E. Fernández Jilberto and Marieke Riethof28   Globalization, Marginalization and DevelopmentEdited by S. Mansoob Murshed29   Programme Aid and DevelopmentBeyond conditionality Howard White and Geske Dijkstra30   Competitiveness Strategy in Developing Countries A manual for policy analysis Edited by Ganeshan Wignaraja31   The African Manufacturing Firm An analysis based on firm  surveys in sub-Saharan Africa Dipak Mazumdar and Ata Mazaheri32   Trade Policy, Growth and Poverty in Asian Developing CountriesEdited by Kishor Sharma33   International Competitiveness, Investment and FinanceA case study of India Edited by A. Ganesh Kumar, Kunal Sen and Rajendra  R. Vaidya34   The Pattern of Aid GivingThe impact of good governance on development assistance Eric Neumayer35   New International Poverty Reduction StrategiesEdited by Jean-Pierre Cling, Mireille Razafindrakoto  and François Roubaud36   Targeting DevelopmentCritical perspectives on the Millennium Development Goals Edited by Richard Black and Howard White37   Essays on Balance of Payments Constrained GrowthTheory and evidence Edited by J.S.L. McCombie and A.P. Thirlwall38   The Private Sector After Communism New entrepreneurial firms in transition economies Jan Winiecki, Vladimir Benacek and Mihaly Laki39   Information Technology and DevelopmentA new paradigm for  delivering the internet to rural areas in developing countries Jeffrey James40   The Economics of Palestine Economic policy and  institutional reform for a  viable Palestine state Edited by David Cobham and Nu’man Kanafani41   Development Dilemmas The methods and political ethics of growth policy Melvin Ayogu and Don Ross42   Rural Livelihoods and Poverty Reduction PoliciesEdited by Frank Ellis and  H. Ade Freeman43   Beyond Market-Driven Development Drawing on the experience of Asia and Latin America Edited by Makoto Noguchi and Costas Lapavitsas 44   The Political Economy of Reform FailureEdited by Mats Lundahl and Michael L. Wyzan 45   Overcoming Inequality in Latin AmericaIssues and challenges for the twenty-first century Edited by Ricardo Gottschalk and Patricia Justino46   Trade, Growth and Inequality in the Era of GlobalizationEdited by Kishor Sharma and Oliver Morrissey47   MicrofinancePerils and prospects Edited by Jude L. Fernando48   The IMF, World Bank and Policy ReformEdited by Alberto Paloni and Maurizio Zanardi49   Managing Development Globalization, economic  restructuring and social policy Edited by Junji Nakagawa50   Who Gains from Free Trade?Export-led growth, inequality and poverty in Latin America Edited by Rob Vos, Enrique Ganuza, Samuel Morley  and Sherman Robinson 51   Evolution of Markets and Institutions A study of an emerging economy Murali Patibandla52   The New FaminesWhy famines exist in an era of globalization Edited by Stephen Devereux53   Development Ethics at Work Explorations – 1960–2002 Denis Goulet54   Law Reform in Developing and Transitional StatesEdited by Tim Lindsey55   The Assymetries of GlobalizationEdited by Pan A. Yotopoulos and Donato Romano56   Ideas, Policies and Economic Development in the AmericasEdited by Esteban  Pérez-Caldentey and Matias Vernengo57   European Union Trade Politics and DevelopmentEverything but arms unravelled Edited by Gerrit Faber and Jan Orbie58   Membership Based Organizations of the PoorEdited by Martha Chen, Renana Jhabvala, Ravi Kanbur  and Carol Richards59   The Politics of Aid SelectivityGood governance criteria in World Bank, U.S. and Dutch development assistance Wil Hout60   Economic Development, Education and Transnational CorporationsMark Hanson61   Achieving Economic Development in the Era of GlobalizationShalendra Sharma62   Sustainable Development and Free TradeShawkat Alam63   The Impact of International Debt ReliefGeske Dijkstra64   Europe’s Troubled RegionEconomic development,  institutional reform and social welfare in the Western Balkans William Bartlett65   Work, Female Empowerment and Economic DevelopmentSara Horrell, Hazel Johnson and Paul Mosley66   The Chronically Poor in Rural BangladeshLivelihood constraints and  capabilities Pk. Md. Motiur Rahman, Noriatsu Matsui and Yukio Ikemoto67   Public–Private Partnerships in Health Care in IndiaLessons for developing  countries A. Venkat Raman and James Warner Björkman68   Rural Poverty and Income Dynamics in Asia and AfricaEdited by Keijiro Otsuka, Jonna P. Estudillo and Yasuyuki Sawada69   Microfinance: A ReaderDavid Hulme and Thankom Arun70   Aid and International NGOsDirk-Jan Koch71   Development MacroeconomicsEssays in memory of Anita Ghatak Edited by Subrata Ghatak and Paul Levine72   Taxation in a Low Income EconomyThe case of Mozambique  Channing Arndt and Finn Tarp73   Labour Markets and Economic DevelopmentEdited by Ravi Kanbur and Jan Svejnar74   Economic Transitions to Neoliberalism in Middle-Income CountriesPolicy dilemmas, crises, mass resistance Edited by Alfedo Saad-Filho and Galip L. Yalman75   Latecomer DevelopmentInnovation and knowledge for economic growth Banji Oyelaran-Oyeyinka and Padmashree Gehl Sampath76   Trade Relations between the EU and AfricaDevelopment, challenges and options beyond the Cotonou Agreement Edited by Yenkong  Ngangjoh-Hodu and Francis  A. S. T Matambalya77   The Comparative Political Economy of DevelopmentAfrica and South Asia Edited by Barbara  Harriss-White and Judith Heyer78   Credit Cooperatives in IndiaPast, present and future Biswa Swarup Misra79   Development Economics in Action (2nd edition)A study of economic policies in Ghana Tony Killick80   The Multinational Enterprise in Developing CountriesLocal versus global logic Edited by Rick Molz, Cătălin Ratiu and Ali Taleb81   Monetary and Financial Integration in West AfricaEdited by Temitope W. Oshikoya82   Reform and Development in ChinaWhat can China offer the  developing world Edited by Ho-Mou Wu and Yang Yao 83   Towards New DevelopmentalismMarket as means rather than master Edited by Shahrukh Rafi Khan and Jens Christiansen84   Culture, Institutions, and DevelopmentNew insights into an old debate Edited by Jean-Philippe Platteau and Robert Peccoud85   Assessing Prospective Trade PolicyMethods applied to  EU–ACP Economic Partnership Agreements Edited by Oliver Morrissey86   Social Protection for Africa’s ChildrenEdited by Sudhanshu Handa, Stephen Devereux and Douglas Webb87   Energy, Bio Fuels and DevelopmentComparing Brazil and the United States Edited by Edmund Amann, Werner Baer and Don Coes88   Value Chains, Social Inclusion and Economic DevelopmentContrasting theories and  realities Edited by A.H.J. (Bert) Helmsing and Sietze Vellema89   Market Liberalism, Growth, and Economic Development  in Latin AmericaEdited by Gerardo Angeles Castro, Ignacio  Perrotini-Hernández and Humberto Ríos-Bolivar90   South–South GlobalizationChallenges and opportunities for development Edited by S. Mansoob Murshed, Pedro Goulart and Leandro  A. Serino91   Trade Infrastructure and Economic DevelopmentEdited by Olu Ajakaiye and  T. Ademola Oyejide92   Microcredit and International DevelopmentContexts, achievements and challenges Edited by Farhad Hossain, Christopher Rees and Tonya Knight-Millar93   Business Regulation and  Non-State ActorsWhose standards? Whose  development? Edited by Darryl Reed and Peter Utting and Ananya Mukherjee Reed94   Public Expenditures for Agricultural and Rural Development  in AfricaEdited by Tewodaj Mogues and Samuel Benin95   The Global Economic Crisis and the Developing WorldImplications and prospects for recovery and growth Edited by Ashwini Deshpande and Keith Nurse96   The Microfinance Impact Ranjula Bali Swain97   Gendered Insecurities, Health and Development in AfricaEdited by Howard Stein and Amal Hassan Fadlalla98   Financial Cooperatives and Local DevelopmentEdited by Silvio Goglio and Yiorgos Alexopoulos99   State-Business Relations and Economic Development in Africa and IndiaEdited by Kunal Sen100  Digital Interactions in Developing CountriesAn economic perspective Jeffrey James101  Migration and InequalityEdited by Tanja Bastia102  Financing Regional Growth and the Inter-American  Development BankThe case of Argentina Ernesto Vivares103  Globalization and DevelopmentRethinking interventions and governance Edited by Arne Bigsten104  Disasters and the Networked EconomyJ.M. Albala-Bertrand105  Microfinance, Debt and  Over-IndebtednessJuggling with money Edited by Isabelle Guérin, Solène Morvant-Roux and Magdalena Villarreal106  The Universal Social  Safety-Net and the Attack  on World PovertyPressing need, manageable cost, practical possibilities,  favourable spillovers Anthony Clunies-Ross and Mozammel Huq107  Youth and Employment in Sub-Saharan AfricaWorking but poor Edited by Hiroyuki Hino and Gustav Ranis108  Financial Stability and GrowthPerspectives on financial  regulation and new  developmentalism Edited by Luiz Carlos  Bresser-Pereira, Jan Kregel and Leonardo Burlamaqui109  A History of Development Economics ThoughtChallenges and counter- challenges Shahrukh Rafi Khan110  Economic Complexity and Human DevelopmentHow economic diversification and social networks affect human agency and welfare Dominik HartmannEconomic Complexity and Human DevelopmentHow economic diversification and social networks affect human agency and welfareDominik HartmannFirst published 2014by Routledge2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RNand by Routledge711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business© 2014 Dominik HartmannThe right of Dominik Hartmann to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patent Act 1988. Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.British Library Cataloguing in Publication DataA catalogue record for this book is available from the British LibraryLibrary of Congress Cataloging in Publication DataHartmann, Dominik, 1980-Economic complexity and human development : how economic diversification and social networks affect human agency and welfare / Dominik Hartmann.pages cmIncludes bibliographical references and index.1. Development economics–Social aspects. 2. Economic development–Social aspects. 3. Economics–Sociological aspects. I. Title.HD75.H387 2014306.3–dc232013039823ISBN: 978-0-415-85891-5 (hbk)ISBN: 978-0-203-72208-4 (ebk)D100Typeset in Times New Roman by Sunrise Setting Ltd, Paignton, UKThe Open Access version of this book, available at www.taylorfrancis.com, has been made available under a Creative Commons Atrribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives 4.0 license. Contents List of figures  xvi List of tables  xvii Preface  xviii Acknowledgements  xxi Abbreviations  xxiii1  Introduction: Economic complexity and  human development  12 Development paradigms  8 2.1 The economic growth 
paradigm 8 2.2 Innovation and structural change 11 2.3 Human development 21 2.4 Modern integral development approaches 38 2.5  Empirical example: Revealing different bottlenecks  for development in Latin America 43 2.6 Chapter conclusion 473 Towards a ‘Sen meets Schumpeter’ approach  49 3.1  Complementarity of Sen and Schumpeter’s  perceptions of development 50 3.2 Contributions and challenges of linking approaches 51 3.3  Using complexity thinking to create bridges:  Networks, diversity and inequality 55 3.4 Chapter conclusion 624 Economic diversification and human development  63 4.1  Economic diversification in the history  of economic thought 65 4.2  The relevance of economic diversification  for human development 68 4.3 Disentangling positive, negative and dynamic effects 69 4.4 Addressing constructive critiques 79 4.5  Empirical exploration of the effects of  economic diversification on human development 81 4.6  Chapter conclusion 905  Social networks, innovation and  human development  92 5.1 Social capital theory 93 5.2 Social networks and innovation 103 5.3  Summary of positive and negative  effects of social networks 107 5.4 Introduction to social network analysis 108 5.5  Case study in Peru: Measuring peasants’  social capital and innovation 114 5.6 Chapter conclusion 1266 Entrepreneurship and human development  128 6.1 Entrepreneurship theories 129 6.2  Micro-entrepreneurship in developing countries:  Obligation or capability enhancement? 134 6.3 Social entrepreneurship 140 6.4 Destructive entrepreneurship 148 6.5 Case study in the north-east of Brazil 149 6.6 Chapter conclusion 1587  Policy dimensions for structural change  and human development  160 7.1 The need for state intervention 162 7.2 Market failures and polarization effects 164 7.3  Specialization and diversification in the  process of structural change 170 7.4  Institutional architecture for structural change  and human development 178xiv Contents 7.5 Labour market and human agency policies 181 7.6 Chapter conclusion 1858 Conclusion: Key ideas and research outlook  187 Bibliography 194 Index 214Contents xv2.1  Carlota Perez’ analysis of technological revolutions and waves  of development in the twentieth century  154.1  Relation between economic diversification and human  development  784.2  Evolution of economic variety and human  development over time  794.3 The effects of related variety on human development and GDP 864.4 The effects of semi-related variety on human development   and GDP 874.5 The effects of unrelated variety on human development and GDP 885.1 A simple network  1085.2 The technical information network of Chaparra  1206.1  Interdisciplinary view of entrepreneurship as capability  enhancement  1346.2  (a) Total early-stage entrepreneurial activity rates and per capita  GDP 2010. (b) Necessity-based early-stage entrepreneurial activity  rates and per capita GDP 2010  136Figures2.1  Divergent growth rates of China and ‘Western’ industrialized  economies between 1400 and 1990 92.2  Positions of countries in the GDP and human development  ranking 222.3  List of human development, well-being and quality of life  measures 302.4 Objective and subjective measures of the quality of life 312.5 Components of the multidimensional poverty index 332.6 Interrelationship of development dimensions 442.7 Patterns of development in Latin America 463.1  Applying complexity thinking to bridge the development  approaches of Sen and Schumpeter 564.1  Theoretical effects of economic diversification on human  development 774.2  Empirical effects of economic diversification  on human development and GDP 844.3  Explanatory power of economic diversification  for human development 855.1 The effects of social networks on human development 1075.2 A simple network matrix 1095.3  Dimensions of social capital and innovation captured in  the questionnaire 1185.4  Centralization and cohesion of the local technical information  network 1215.5  Impact of the NGO on the betweenness centralities  of the farmers in the local technical information network 1225.6  Correlations between the farmers’ social capital and their  innovation performance 1246.1 Type and number of interviewees 1516.2 Interview topics 152TablesPrefaceThis book constitutes my doctoral thesis in economics at the University of Hohenheim. But more than a title, it is the final outcome of a research  journey of seven years, which has taken me from Germany to Spain, Peru, Brazil, Netherlands, England and Turkey, collecting information and seeking advice on the relations between economic development and human development. This research endeavour aims to contribute to the creation of bridges between structural change and human development research and examine the variety of methods that allow us to explore and research the complex relations between social networks, economic diversity and human development. It is highly scepti-cal of two-dimensional categorizations, such as black-and-white thinking, which simplify a multidimensional and complex world. The main motivation behind this book resulted from an internship in agricul-tural development projects at a Peruvian non-governmental organization (NGO), in the autumn of 2005. The NGO brought farmers together to create associations and produce and distribute value added, durable agricultural goods. I was given the task of elaborating, in cooperation with the farmers, a marketing plan for their products. The experienced project managers of my NGO deliberately sought to promote the commercialization and business aspect of their project, as they con-sidered it a critical factor in promoting sustainable development in less developed regions. When evaluating his personal success after thirty years in development projects, one project manager said: ‘Well, I think we have contributed to a higher and better production of local goods. We have also contributed to capacity build-ing, democracy and human rights; yet often it has also felt like we have taken one step forwards and two steps backwards. I think one core problem has been selling the products that we had improved and creating a sustained income source’. I learned from this experience that social development is a crucial part of development; however, it must also go hand in hand with economic and business development. This requires interdisciplinary approaches that take the complex relations between economic and human development into account. Another les-son I learned from working in this project was that business development itself is strongly related to promoting human agency, skills, innovation and social capi-tal. I thought that the efficiency of production and the income of the farmers could have been significantly increased if they could have supplied their basic Preface xixproducts or work to bigger companies in more advanced sectors and distribution systems. Most clients would certainly have appreciated that sort of social choice, which would have enabled them to obtain paid employment instead of struggling with their small agricultural businesses. The NGO did excellent work on the local level, although I began to wonder if a more concerted structural policy by the gov-ernment and private sector companies would have facilitated the establishment of competitive companies able to benefit from economies of scale and establish national and global distribution chains. My experiences with the NGO deepened my interest in learning about the rela-tions between business development, structural change and social welfare. When I returned to the University of Augsburg in Germany, I wrote my Master’s thesis on ‘Systems of Innovation and Competence Building in Latin America’. This led me to the work of several researchers, who suggested introducing the understandings of Amartya Sen and the human capability approach when applying the innovation system approach to developing countries (Arocena and Sutz 2005; Johnson et al. 2003; United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2001). This helped me to became aware of three things. First, the learning and problem-solving capabili-ties of the entire population must be improved in order to create prolific regional, sectoral and national innovation systems. Second, endogenous development and external knowledge transfers must complement each other. Third, innovation should not merely be considered as a tool for improving human development, but more as being essentially intertwined with human agency and development. This convinced me that innovation is a key driver of both social and economic devel-opment, but equally, as with economic growth, I do not consider it the ultimate goal. The goal is human agency, freedom and well-being, for their own sakes, not merely as an offshoot of the expansion of production or the installation of new technologies. This led me to consider several questions. What are the effects of innovation-driven structural change on human development? What are the interrelations between diverse types of entrepreneurship and human agency? And what role does social network play in people’s choices and capabilities? These questions gave birth to the basic motivation behind this book, which is intended to help dis-entangle the complex relations between innovation, structural change and human development. Searching for information and advice led me to many different places to research, study and work. I first completed a Master’s in International Economics and Development at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid; then for my doc-toral studies in innovation economics I went to the University of Bremen, the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro and the University of Hohenheim; and for case and empirical studies I travelled to the Centre for Studies and Promotion of Development (DESCO) in Peru, to the Microfinance Institute Estrela in Patos, Brazil and to the Centre of Innovation Studies at the Eindhoven University of Technology. I am very grateful for the ideas and advice from many people on this research journey. I finally finished my PhD thesis at the Chair of Innovation Economics of the University of Hohenheim and defended it in March 2012.xx PrefaceIn summary, this book is the result of a research journey which aims to  contribute to an emergent strand of research and policymaking that analyses the complex relations between innovation, structural change and human development and seeks to design economic policies that do not merely raise economic produc-tion, but rather raise the welfare and agency of the people.I am grateful to the many people who have helped and inspired me during this research journey, and in particular I would like to thank the following. First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to my PhD supervisor Andreas Pyka, from the University of Hohenheim. I have worked with him since my  graduate studies in Augsburg in 2003; in all that time he has always believed in me, given me expert advice and the freedom to follow my ideas. He instilled my  interest in the impor-tance of innovation, networks and economic diversification for development. My appreciation is extended to Atilio Arata, Alberto Rubina and my colleagues from DESCO, Arequipa and Lima, for giving me enthusiasm for development: the chapter in this book on social capital and human development was improved sig-nificantly by a joint empirical study on social capital and  innovation in rural regions of Peru. My professors and friends from the Master in International Economics and Development at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid (UCM), to whom I am indebted, I want to thank for teaching me a  critical and creative perspective on development. Furthermore I wish to acknowledge with much appreciation the dedicated work of Edinalda Lima and my former  colleagues from the microfi-nance Estrela Institute in Paraiba, Brazil. The chapter on entrepreneurship and human development was inspired by the highly motivated and competent team of the Estrela Institute. My respect and gratitude goes also to Koen Frenken and the researchers at the Technical University of Eindhoven, who provided very useful advice and ideas for my doctoral thesis in general and the chapter on economic diversification and human development in particular. With respect to this chapter, I would also like to extend my thanks to Pier Paolo Saviotti and Andrew Stirling, whose ideas on diversity deeply affected this work. I would like to offer my thanks also to the participants of the many conferences, workshops and summer schools I have attended. All of them gave me significant insights and advice – most importantly, the participants at the Human Development and Capability Conferences in Lima 2009 and The Hague 2011, the Schumpeter ISS confer-ence in Rio de Janeiro 2007 and the DIMETIC European doctoral schools at BETA Strasbourg and UNU-MERIT in 2011. I am also grateful for the coordina-tion of the Mercator IPC fellowship program, in particular Daniel Grütjen and Onur Sazak, at the Istanbul Policy Center, who supported me in the revision for this Routledge publication. A special thanks is due to the invaluable support of Acknowledgementsxxii AcknowledgementsDavid Hendrix who has twice critically read through the entire manuscript and encouraged me to give more examples and keep the language self-explanatory for the interested but not specialised reader. My appreciation goes to Carlota Perez for her seminal work on technological revolutions and waves of development and allowing me to use her figure on the ‘panorama of the changing context of the twentieth century’. I am indebted to Donna Kelley and the international GEM consortia for permitting me the use of empirical figures on total early stage and necessity-based entrepreneurship from the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2010 Global Report. The empirical study on systems of innovation and development in Latin America (in Chapter 2) draws upon a joint publication with Andreas Pyka and Horst Hanusch in the journal Structural Change and Economic Dynamics in 2010; I want to thank Elsevier for allowing me to use several excerpts and tables of this work. I am also grateful to the professors Harald Hagemann and Alexander Gerybadze, who formed part of the PhD board in my thesis defence to become a doctor of economics at the University of Hohenheim.There are countless friends, colleagues and family members who I would also like to take this opportunity to acknowledge and thank warmly. I thank all those who have kindly helped me in various ways, with whom I have had many inten-sive discussions and who read through various parts of this thesis, in particular: Fernando del Rio, Giorgio Triulzi, Stefan Mendritzki, Laura Pawson, Guadalupe Calderon, Michael Fendt, Florian Keller, Stefan Gschossmann, Anita Hernanz Ruiz, Markus Wallner, Tobias Buchmann, Evangelos Bourelos, Monika Faulstich, Lai Ping Lee and George Dyson. Finally, and most importantly of all, I wish to thank my parents, my sister and my wife for their endless love and support.Dominik HartmannAugsburg, 19 July 2013AbbreviationsBNDES Brazilian National Development BankBoP Base of the PyramidCIS Community Innovation SurveyCNSE Comprehensive Neo-Schumpeterian EconomicsDESCO Centre for Studies and Promotion of Development in PeruGCI Global Competitiveness IndexGDP PPP Gross Domestic Product at Purchasing Power ParityGlobelics  The Global Network for the Economics of Learning, Innovation, and Competence Building SystemsHDCA The Human Development and Capability ApproachHDI Human Development IndexHHI Hirschman-Herfindahl IndexICT Information and Communication TechnologyILO International Labour OrganizationINEI Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática de Perú IPC Istanbul Policy CenterISI Import Substitution IndustrializationISS International Joseph A. Schumpeter SocietyLASA Latin American Structuralist Approach (or School)MFI Micro-Finance InstitutionMNE Multinational EnterpriseMPI Multidimensional Poverty IndexNBER The National Bureau of Economic Research – USANC Network CohesionND Network DensityNGO Non-Governmental OrganizationNIS National Innovation SystemOECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and DevelopmentR&D Research and DevelopmentRCA Revealed Comparative AdvantageSENASA Peruvian National State Agency for Agricultural HealthSITC Standard 
International Trade ClassificationSME Small and Medium Enterprisexxiv AbbreviationsSNA Social Network AnalysisSTEPS  Social, Technological and Environmental Pathways to SustainabilitySTI Science, Technology and InnovationUNDP United Nations Development ProgrammeUNU-MERIT  The United Nations University – Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and TechnologyEconomic diversification and social networks affect the social choices and human agency of people in a multitude of positive, negative and ambiguous ways. Having limited social contacts and few occupational choices tends to limit the opportunities people have in choosing and determining their own lives. Even assuming that people had the same level of education and health, an eighteen-year-old person living in a city with an advanced economy (for example which produces cars, software and multiple services), tends to have more social choices and opportunities for lifelong capability upgrading compared to a person living in an local economy showing a low-level of economic complexity with a few dis-connected economic sectors, small-scale agriculture, informal mining and some garment-trading activities. Improving the educational level of and the health serv-ices available to people living in an economy with a low-level of complexity and productive capabilities is an important factor, but on its own is not enough to achieve a sustained convergence of the development and social choice capabili-ties of these two different economies. The type and quality of the occupational choices in an economy, as well as the type of personal networks, are essential for the agency and life quality of the people. Yet high levels of economic diversity and large social networks can also lead to difficult decision processes and the high opportunity costs of activities which were not chosen by the individuals may result in a negative impact on their quality of life. Development policies must furthermore consider the fact that economies, their agents, relations, goals and choices are not static, but due to the introduction of economic and social innovation, change over time and differ between various regions and countries. Because of market failures and negative polarization effects, governments need to create an institutional framework and incentive structures that encourage (a) the connectedness of people to diverse social networks and (b) the emergence of sectors that deliberately promote not just economic growth but also human agency and welfare. In addition, sound policy-making needs to recognize that the capabilities people require to become full members of their society and be able to determine their own lives change over time. Whereas physi-cal strength may have been crucial at one point, Internet literacy is increasingly important in the modern age to be (considered) a full member of the society. Indeed, modern approaches in development economics consider development as 1 Introduction  Economic complexity and human development2 Introductiona set of complex and dynamic processes with multiple directions, goals and causal relations between diverse agents (e.g. Social, Technological and Environmental Pathways to Sustainability (STEPS) centre 2010; Stirling 2010). Recently, the terms innovation, social networks, diversity, entrepreneurship and also life quality, human development and happiness have gained relative impor-tance alongside traditional topics such as capital accumulation and economic growth. The approach elaborated in this book contributes to the modern perspec-tive on development, which highlights the complex and dynamic character of development, by (a) showing theoretical and methodological possibilities on how to combine the complementary perspectives of the human capability approach, innovation and structural change economics; and (b) asking how innovation-driven economic diversification and social networks affect human agency and welfare. It considers development as a process of structural changes, which from a human development perspective should lead to the expansion of human capabili-ties and agency (Chapter 3). It also shows through the discussion of the complex relations between diversification and human development (in Chapter 4), social networks, innovation and human development (in Chapter 5) as well as (social) entrepreneurship and human development (in Chapter 6) that structural economic change and human development are highly interrelated forces of development. A sustained expansion of human development requires the joint action of human development, innovation and structural change policies (Chapter 7).Over the last few decades, the human development approach has become the dominant approach of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and has also become an approach applied by thousands of development agen-cies worldwide. In other words, it affects the lives of millions of people through projects aiming to address basic needs and empower people. Human development refers to the capabilities of people to actively make decisions and to participate in the development of their societies (Sen 1999; UNDP 1990). It is for this reason that minimum standards in education, health, shelter, income and other dimen-sions are necessary to empower people. Yet there are still many people (1.3 billion in 2008, according to the World Bank 2013) around the world who are living on less than US$1.25 a day, and too many people are deprived of their basic human rights and access to the decent healthcare and education that would allow them to live healthy, long and full lives. The United Nations and an increasing number of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and social entrepreneurs aim to address the needs of these people. At the same time, cutting-edge approaches in economic development emphasize the need for economic diversification to bring about economic competitiveness and growth (e.g. Hausmann and Rodrik 2003; Rodrik 2004; Saviotti and Pyka 2004; Frenken et al. 2007; Hidalgo et al. 2007). This approach sees economic development as a recombinant process, in which economies’ technological and productive capabilities are formed through prolific interaction, cooperation and competition between diverse agents from the public and private sectors. Innovation and development economists argue that prolific innovation systems and dynamic entrepreneurs are necessary to generate, implement and diffuse new products, processes, inputs, markets and organizations Introduction 3(Schumpeter 1912; Freeman 1987). As innovations are often new  recombinations and alterations of existing competences, a diversity of ideas and knowledge spurs the recombinant growth of new technologies and ultimately leads to the emergence of new sectors (Jacobs 1969). Governments and companies across the world aim to upgrade their technological capabilities to diversify into higher value added sectors, achieving economic competitiveness and providing more and better occupational choices. Key words of this approach include ‘innovation’, ‘entrepreneurship’, ‘innovation networks’ and ‘high-tech clusters’.This book argues that merely focusing on economic diversification or on human development is not enough to promote sustained social progress and a more equal distribution of capabilities and outcomes across the world. Both approaches are needed, because they can complement and reinforce each other. Whereas eco-nomic growth does not automatically trickle down to the poor, neither is an emphasis on human capabilities alone enough to create the economic demand for such capabilities. The establishment of higher value added sectors, providing more and better jobs for the poor, needs both economic policies to create the insti-tutional framework and subsidies required to trigger learning processes as well as human development policies which are needed for a better educated, healthy and creative labour force. Furthermore, the productive structure and level of eco-nomic diversification of a country profoundly influence the types of occupational choices available and the contribution that economic growth makes to human agency and welfare. Creativity and demand-driven innovation and structural change are almost impossible without a well-educated and healthy population. However, sustained endogenous investment in human development is difficult to realize without simultaneous investment in economic competitiveness and diversification. Social innovations, such as microfinance, can indeed be powerful mechanisms for providing the poor with the means to help themselves, but they are not enough to allow the formation of globally competitive, small and medium enterprises; a well-educated, healthy and creative workforce that has better access to better jobs is also required. All of this simply means that human and economic development policies are complementary forces. It is, therefore, very important that we gain a better understanding of the linkages between human development and the structures and dynamics of socioeconomic systems if we are to design prolific development policies in the real world. The idea that the forces of human development and economic growth are not in opposition but rather complement each other is certainly not entirely new. It is worth noting that the UNDP human development index (HDI) is composed of three equal parts: life expectancy, education and income (UNDP 1990, 2010). Some of the leading researchers in the human capability approach discuss how economic growth and opportunities can improve human freedom (e.g. Sen 1999; Ranis et al. 2000; Ocampo and Vallejo 2012). There are also new initiatives coming from the innovation and structural change research community, who deliberately take the human capability approach into account (e.g. STEPS cen-tre, Globelics). Recently, interesting approaches have appeared which scrutinize the effects of productivity growth and structural change or the effects of social capital on human development (e.g. Ranis et al. 2000; Ibrahim 2006; Ocampo and Vallejo 2012; Capriati 2013). Nevertheless, there is still a need for more work on increasing the level of interdisciplinary cooperation between human development and leading innovation approaches, by taking into account the findings of each other. Alkire (2010), for example, has shown that in twenty years of UN Human Development Reports, ‘the terms work and employment only appear under the names creativity and productivity and only for five years’ (Alkire 2010, p. 14). At the Global Network for Economics of Learning, Innovation and Competence Building System there are still comparatively few works which deliberately focus on and enter into the concepts employed by the human development approach (e.g. Johnson et al. 2003; Arocena and Sutz 2005; Cozzen and Kaplinsky 2009; Capriati 2013). It can be argued that the difficulties in establishing interdiscipli-nary approaches are not due to a lack of interest on either side. Rather, it is due to a series of complex issues. One of these is a natural tendency for researchers to continue working in their core field of expertise. The complexity of interdiscipli-nary work and the difficulties of publishing such work in leading journals can also lead to scientists conforming to the established or dominant approaches within their research community approaches. This book aims to contribute ideas on how bot research communities can learn from each other to shed new light on the com-plex relations between economic growth and human development. It attempts to do so by disentangling the positive, negative and ambiguous effects of economic diversification and social networks on human agency and welfare, and presents a set of different methods that enable more comprehensive engagement with the relations between economic diversity, social networks and human development.This book is structured as follows. Chapter 2 discusses the core ideas and con-cepts of the different approaches in development economics that are essential to understanding the work presented here: (a) the neoclassical economic growth paradigm; (b) the innovation and structural change paradigm; and (c) the human development approach. Focus is placed on the last two approaches; however, the first must be taken into account, as both the innovation as well as the human devel-opment approach developed partly out of a critique of the neoclassical approach. To demonstrate the need for interdisciplinary approaches, a short empirical study of Latin America shows that none of the approaches (i.e. human development, innovation or economic efficiency) were individually able to provide a fully comprehensive picture of the strengths and bottlenecks of development. Whereas some countries and regions in Latin America suffer from serious levels of poverty, violence and unfreedom, the main challenges for further improvement in other countries and regions may be more related to the lack of technological capabilities or economic efficiency.Having laid out the main terms, ideas and concepts of the innovation economics and human development approach, and having shown the empirical shortcomings of each specialised approach, Chapter 3 then presents the ‘Sen meets Schumpeter’ paradigm. This approach aims to disentangle and analyse some of the complex relations between individuals’ capabilities and the structures and dynamics of the socioeconomic systems that people live under, to broaden the information 4 Introductionbase which economic policies can make use of to deliberately promote not just  economic growth but also human development. In addition, complexity thinking is used – as a third approach – in an attempt to create bridges between the different approaches. Complexity approaches emphasize agents, networks and diversity as key features of complex systems. Neo-Schumpeterian approaches take these features explicitly into account to study the novelties that are created through entrepreneurship and the interaction of diverse agents in complex systems. A main driver of diversification (of sectors, ideas etc.) processes is innovation, which itself is driven by entrepreneurship and interactive learning between diverse agents of the economy. Within the so-called ‘Sen meets Schumpeter’ approach we recognize that social networks, entrepreneurship and economic diversification are not just core features of structural economic change; they also directly affect human agency and the welfare of individuals. These three structural features and drivers of economic systems can contrib-ute to understanding the complex relations between economic growth and human development and help to design innovation and structural change policies that do not just facilitate economic growth, but deliberately empower and increase peo-ple’s social choices. This perspective places human development at the core of development, yet also claims that structural change and innovation policies, which take network structures and the value of different types of entrepreneurial choices and network structures into account, can be important factors in improving peo-ple’s agency and welfare. Based on this approach, the subsequent chapters present theoretical and empirical means that help to disentangle the positive, negative and ambiguous effects that economic diversification (Chapter 4), social networks (Chapter 5) and entrepreneurship (Chapter 6) can have on human agency and wel-fare, as well as what structural change policies need to take into account and how they need to be designed to deliberately provide valuable new social choices and facilitate people’s capabilities and their well-being (Chapter 7).Chapter 4 argues that economic diversification can expand the social choices of individuals (e.g. their occupational choices) and influences which capabilities are demanded in an economy. Diversification, furthermore, can prevent the emer-gence of rigid top-down networks in an economy and favour more democratic regimes through better distribution of economic power. Nevertheless, at very high levels of economic diversification, people may be paralysed by the increasing complexity of decision processes and thus well-being can be negatively affected. Consequently an emphasis is required on promoting real new 
choices (rather than, for instance, choosing between a massive number of very similar products) as well as improving people’s capabilities of dealing with complexity through appropriate education systems. A cross-sectional analysis of over 121 countries confirms that economic diversity has a significant positive effect on human development. Export data from over 772 product categories was used to calculate different measurements of diversity and their impact on income per capita and on the HDI. The results are highly significant for all the diversity measures applied: entropy and the Hirschman-Herfindahl index (HHI) revealed comparative  advantages and average product ubiquity on the different levels of disaggregation Introduction 5(1-, 2- and 4-digit level) in the Standard International Trade classification (SITC). The analysis  confirms the hypothesis that economic diversification affects human development and economic growth in different ways. Unrelated and related eco-nomic variety have a marginally increasing positive effect on income; related variety and product proliferation have a marginally decreasing positive effect on human development.Chapter 5 studies in more detail how social networks affect people’s capabili-ties of becoming active agents of development. Social networks have a major effect on the diversity of information and help that people can access (Woolcock and Narayan 2000; Borgatti et al. 2009). Networks strongly impact the choices (e.g. occupations, life styles, nutrition, etc.) that people are aware of and the entre-preneurial actions and learning processes that they engage in. People’s capabilities and functioning (i.e abilities and achievements) are not merely based on their indi-vidual skills, national institutions (such as laws and regulation) or the provision of social services (e.g. schools and healthcare centres), but also on their direct net-works as individuals, such as through their parents, friends and colleagues. A case study shows how the capabilities of peasants to innovate in a small agricultural valley in Peru are even more dependent on their embeddedness in social networks than on their formal education.Chapter 6 studies the relations between entrepreneurship and human agency in more detail. Entrepreneurship does not necessarily indicate the presence of human agency and freedom if the individuals involved are forced into engaging in entrepreneurial action owing to a lack of other occupational choices (often in an under-diversified economy). New concepts such as entrepreneurship as a functioning (Gries and Naude 2010) or social entrepreneurship (Yunus 2007), however, show new ways of interpreting and evaluating entrepreneurship. They do not merely focus on the contribution of entrepreneurship to the expansion of economic production, but rather evaluate the contribution of entrepreneurial actions to human capabilities and agency of the entrepreneurs as well as the soci-ety as a whole. The chapter will present a qualitative case study based in north-east Brazil that shows how social innovations, such as microfinance, can contribute to people’s human agency. Nevertheless, comparatively weak network structures in the support system prevent further improvements in human agency and welfare.Chapter 7 deals with the question of how to make structural change policies work for human development. Following the basic ideas of Rodrik (2004), it is shown that appropriate institutions must be designed and industrial policies must necessarily be put in place (covering areas such as information, coordination and technology externalities) to overcome market failures, and to trigger self-discovery processes and economic diversification (Hausmann and Rodrik 2003). The chapter goes on to explore the need for structural change, network and human develop-ment policies to overcome intrinsic inequality reproduction stemming from the effects of polarization (Myrdal 1957; Hirschman 1958). To promote a high stand-ard of social welfare, policy makers must find, in cooperation with the actors involved, an appropriate balance between seemingly contrary forces such as spe-cialization and diversification, related and unrelated variety growth, regional and 6 Introductionnational policy-making or cooperation and competition. Indeed these terms are not  necessarily contrary; they can, in fact, be complementary forces of development. As such, it is crucial to involve in an open and prolific manner social policy mak-ers, civil society and sectors central to the improvement of human development (such as education, health and regional development agencies) in the industrial policy-making process, to promote mutual understanding between the different interests and needs of the different groups and promote interactive learning and innovation.Chapter 8 summarizes what has been presented in the book and gives a research outlook as to how further theoretical emphasis on occupational choices as well as new methods such as agent-based modelling and the use of big data can contrib-ute to an understanding of the relations between economic complexity, structural change and human development. The empirical examples in the book reveal how a variety of different methods can be applied to explore the relations between economic growth and human development. Of course, much more research is nec-essary to obtain a more comprehensive picture of the complex relations between structural change, economic complexity and human development. It is shown, however, that there are multiple theoretical and empirical ways in which it may be possible to further explore and research the complex relations between economic growth and social welfare, by combining the human development approach with approaches from complexity research, innovation economics and development economics. This book aims to help the emergent research community, revealing how economic and human development policies can reinforce and complement each other.Introduction 7What is development? In which directions could and should societies develop? What are the drivers of development? There are no simple answers to any of these questions. Multiple opinions and arguments have been advanced and discussed by philosophers, scientists, politicians and members of society in general. Different answers have shaped the evolution of societies, the direction and types of techno-logical progress as well as our value systems, the modes of economic production and the relationship between humans and nature. This chapter outlines three main paradigms that over the last century have dominated the thinking about develop-ment in industrialized countries:•	 the economic growth paradigm, highlighting the role of capital accumulation and aggregated production;•	 the innovation paradigm, highlighting the importance of novelty, interactive and cumulative knowledge and qualitative change;•	 the human development paradigm, focusing on individual freedom and well-being, highlighting distributional justice, quality of life and self-determination.In practice all three approaches influence and are connected to the value systems of virtually all industrialized societies. However, there is a debate about the pri-ority and weight that should be provided to each development paradigm. This book does not aim to constitute a comprehensive critique of this understanding of development (for an example, see Rist 1996), but focuses instead on the relations between the three components in order to formulate policies that facilitate struc-tural change for human development.2.1 The economic growth paradigmSince the Industrial Revolution, the term ‘development’ has been closely connected to the expansion of production, income and consumption. This is sub-stantiated by the empirical observation that the Industrial Revolution led to an explosion in production and a steep rise in the standard of living, both of which, until then, were unprecedented in the history of humanity (Maddison, 2003). It also led to a great divergence in income between different areas of the world. 2 Development paradigmsDevelopment paradigms 9Table 2.1 compares the evolution of the per capita income between China and the Western European countries and their historical offspring between 1400 and 1989 (based on Maddison 1991). We can see how western Europe along with USA, Canada and Australia rapidly grew in the second part of the nineteenth century and the twentieth century, whereas the economic production in other regions such as China stagnated until the last decades of the twentieth century.Before the Industrial Revolution spread from England to other European states and North America, the increases and declines of absolute production figures have been closely related to the population growth or decline. In many regions, the basic way of living and production has been relatively similar for several centu-ries. This drastically changed with the arrival of the Industrial Revolution. The fact that modern economic growth rates were greater than population growth (Kuznets 1966) allowed for an enormous expansion of occupational and con-sumption choices. Large numbers of new jobs and professions were created and people found themselves with an increasing number of choices in terms of food, housing, health and leisure. Such growth allowed the state to raise an unprec-edented amount in taxation, which could be reinvested into public goods such as infrastructure, education and the establishment of social security systems. For this reason, it is quite natural that the term ‘development’ has been strongly con-nected with economic growth. Consequently, economists and politicians dealt less with the theoretical and philosophical question ‘what is development?’, and more often with ‘how to promote economic growth?’ While ideas of justice and the ethical distribution of income played a role in development economics (e.g. Marx 1867; Rawls 1971), economic growth has increasingly been identified by the most influential approaches to development as the core factor in raising the standard of living. This can be seen in the way that governments that favour free-market forces and those that foster state-led development (including com-munist countries) have put strong emphasis on the expansion of production. Since Adam Smith (1776) identified the division of labour and trade as key factors for the wealth of nations, economists have tried to identify and explain the key driv-ers of economic growth. Economists, sociologists and historians such as David Ricardo, Karl Marx and Joseph Schumpeter came up with a variety of explanations, Table 2.1 Divergent growth rates of China and ‘Western’ industrialized economies between 1400 and 1990 Evolution of GDP per cápita 1400 1820 1950 1989 Growth between (in US$ from 1985)      1400 and 1989 aChina 500    500    454   2,361    372%Western European economies 430 1,034 4,902 14,413 3,252% (and the historical offspring USA,  Canada and Australia)Source: Adapted from Maddison (1991, p. 10).Notea Growth rates added.10 Development paradigmsincluding factors such as international trade, technological progress or  institutional changes. For a long time the three production factors – capital, labour and land – have been considered as the dominant growth driver (Malthus 1803; Marx 1867; Solow 1956). This is natural, because the picture of growth is strongly connected with visible changes such as: (a) the creation of new factories, industry and capital; (b) the construction of railways, streets and buildings; (c) new jobs and a growing population density in megacities: and/or (d) the exploitation of new resources and lands. While this approach is still influential in government policy (as well as being taught in introductory economics across the world), the focus today is increas-ingly turning towards institutional and technological progress as the main growth drivers (Romer 1986, 1990; Fagerberg et al. 2005; Acemoglu 2009). Theorizing about the role of technological progress has played an important role throughout the history of economic thinking, and can be seen in theorists from Smith (1776) to Marx (1867) and Schumpeter (1912, 1939, 1943). However, technology has been considered an exogenous factor and was not endogenously explained within the most influential mainstream growth models dating from the 1950s until the early 1990s. The growth models of Robert Solow (1956, 1957) are probably the most widespread growth models taught in universities around the world and form the basis for mainstream macroeconomics. Solow’s growth accounting approach (1957) considers that total production is dependent on three factors: capital (K), labour (L) and the total factor productivity (A). On the basis of a set of assump-tions, the model predicts a (conditional) convergence in the income of different countries, as long as free-market forces are in place. Arguably the most important and critical assumptions are the following. 1 The production factors capital, labour and land are homogeneous across dif-ferent countries. This means that there are, for instance, no differences in the age and skills of labourers in different regions. 2 There are diminishing returns to the single factors of capital and labour. For example, given a constant number of ten workers, the first textile machine has a stronger effect on the production expansion than the 100th machine, owing to the rate of depreciation and capacity of the labourer to use them. 3 Technology is freely available and all economic agents and countries have produce at the technology frontier. 4 All agents are fully informed (e.g. of prices, scarcities, technologies) and act rationally: in other words, agents always choose the best technology, the most efficient workers and the best and cheapest products. 5 The total factor productivity (in the model) is only related to the capital growth as labour is considered to be fairly constant. These assumptions lead to the situation that all countries conditionally converge in the model to an optimal capital stock, as long as free-market forces are in place and the assumptions are fulfilled. If all countries guarantee free-market forces, trade and rational economic behaviour, then the best possible outcome will be Development paradigms 11achieved and the income of the countries will converge, up to some  natural level of inequality, which can for example be due to different natural resource endow-ment and geographical conditions of the countries. Subsequent strands of research, such as the polarization theory (e.g. Perroux 1955; Myrdal 1957; Lasuén 1973), the endogenous growth theory (Romer 1986, 1990; Rebelo 1991; Krugman (1991a, 1991b) and Neo-Schumpeterian economics (Hanusch and Pyka 2007b), have empirically and theoretically shown that many of the assumptions of Solow and other neoclassical deductive models do not properly resemble the complexity and dynamics of the real world. Recent approaches stress further crucial factors, such as knowledge externalities, agglomeration and cumulative effects, which can lead to economic divergence. This book will explain the ideas of some of the contemporary approaches, focusing on innovation and economic diversifi-cation; however, it is beyond the aim and scope of this book to enter into the details of all the various models of mainstream economic growth literature. The interested reader can refer to the models of Romer (1986, 1990), Rebelo (1991), Krugman (1991a, 1991b), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1991) and Ray (1998) for an overview on growth models and development economics.It can be argued that the economic growth paradigm takes for granted that pro-duction and income expansion are the core dimensions (or at least the best proxy measures) of development. The focus of this paradigm is not so much on the qual-itative question ‘what is development?’ but rather on ‘how can economic growth be stimulated?’, and ‘why does the economy of one country grow faster than another?’ as well as considering circumstances under which income convergence or divergence can be expected. Income and production is basically considered to be development. It has been assumed and shown in deductive models that market forces would lead to a Pareto optimal distribution of income and that an 
increase in the overall productio