Complexity stage model of the medical device development based on economic evaluation-MedDee

sustainabilityArticleComplexity Stage Model of the MedicalDevice Development Based onEconomic Evaluation—MedDeePetra Marešová 1 , Lukáš Peter 2 , Jan Honegr 3, Lukáš Režný 1 , Marek Penhaker 2 ,Martin Augustýnek 2, Hana Mohelská 4, Blanka Klímová 5 and Kamil Kucˇa 1,*1 Department of Economics, University of Hradec Kralove, Rokitanskeho 62, 3 50003 Hradec Kralove,Czech Republic; petra.maresova@uhk.cz (P.M.); lukas.rezny@uhk.cz (L.R.)2 Department of Cybernetics and Biomedical Engineering, VSB—Technical University of Ostrava, FEEC,17. Listopadu 15, 708 33 Ostrava—Poruba, Czech Republic; lukas.peter@vsb.cz (L.P.);marek.penhaker@vsb.cz (M.P.); martin.augustynek@vsb.cz (M.A.)3 Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospital Hradec Králové, Sokolská 581, 500 05 Hradec Králové,Czech Republic; jan.honegr@fnhk.cz4 Department of Management, University of Hradec Kralove, Rokitanskeho 62, 3 50003 Hradec Kralove,Czech Republic; hana.mohelska@uhk.cz5 Department of Applied Linguistics, University of Hradec Kralove, Rokitanskeho 62, 3 50003 Hradec Kralove,Czech Republic; blanka.klimova@uhk.cz* Correspondence: kamil.kuca@uhk.czReceived: 12 December 2019; Accepted: 23 February 2020; Published: 26 February 2020Abstract: The development of a new product is essential for the progress and success of any company.The medical device market is very specific, which is challenging. Therefore, this paper assesses aneconomic model for medical device evaluation using the economic, health, technology regulatory,and present market knowledge to enable the cost–time conception for any applicant. The purposeof this study is to propose a comprehensive stage model of the medical device development tosubsequently describe the financial expenditure of the entire development process. The identificationof critical steps was based on the literature review, and analysis, and a comparison of the availablemedical device development stages and directives. Furthermore, a preliminary assessment of themedical device development steps and procedures on the basis of the interviews was performed. Sixinterviews were conducted with an average duration of one hour, focusing on areas: relevance andlevel of detail of the medical device development stages, involvement of economic methods, andapplicability of the proposed model. Subsequently, the improvement and modification of the medicaldevice investment process, based on respondents’ responses, were conducted. The authors haveproposed the complexity model MedDee—Medical Devices Development by Economic Evaluation.This model is comprised of six phases: initiation, concept, design, production, final verification, andmarket disposition in which the economic methods are incorporated.Keywords: medical device; development; economic evaluation; model; regulatory1. IntroductionThe development of a new product is essential for the progress and success of any company.This assertion is particularly true for the challenging medical device (MD) market. However, thedevelopment of the new MD is often uncertain and expensive [1,2]. Moreover, due to the innovationresearch required, MD development introduces many risks. Therefore, great attention is being paid tothe evaluation of investment effectiveness into MDs [3]. Altogether, there are three main groups ofSustainability 2020, 12, 1755; doi:10.3390/su12051755 www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2020, 12, 1755 2 of 27methods: strategic and financial valuation of projects (e.g., Net Present Value (NPV), Internal Rate ofReturn (IRR), Discounted Cash Flow (DCF)); weighting and scoring of products and product criteria(e.g., analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and conjoint analysis); and human decision-making (fuzzylogic, actuarial models, neural networks, technology road mapping, and expert systems). As for thestrategic and financial aspects, Vernon et al. [4] used NPV in order to establish maximum willingnessto pay (WTP) based on criteria such as cost-effectiveness thresholds. Freiberg and Scholtz [5] proposeda discrete event simulation in order to determine the effectiveness of investment into technologicaldevelopment, based on calculations of NPV, IRR, and payback period. Kiliç and Kaya (2015) [6]used in their model, type-2 fuzzy AHP and type-2 fuzzy The Technique for Order of Preference bySimilarity to Ideal Solution (TOPSIS). Finally, Vallejo-Torres et al. (2011) [7] used Bayesian methods,illustrating how these methods can be utilized to include all the data available at different developmentstages. While such models are necessary in order to give a clear structure to any complex developmentproject which involves considerable resources and investments, the very complexity of these modelingapproaches makes them difficult to apply in a real-life company environment. This obstacle topractical use was discussed by Money et al. [8], who devised a relatively simple spreadsheet-based toolintended to lead companies smoothly through the decision-making process and facilitate a commonunderstanding between the companies and the NHS National Innovation Centre. Continuing in theeffort to build a bridge between theory and practice, Ijzerman and Steuten [9] researched the questionof how likely Health Technology Assesment (HTA) is to be utilized by development companies in thedecision-making process. Surveys conducted in selected companies [10] suggest that among commonlyused methods informing the decision-making, there are discounted cash flow (DCF), unstructuredpeer reviews, scoring checklists, and decision tree analyses. Bootman [11] pointed out the differencesbetween the various types of economic evaluation, from cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA), throughcost-utility analysis (CUA), to cost-benefit analysis (CBA). Danner et al. [12] characterize the analyticalhierarchy process (AHP) as a multi-criterial analysis type which takes into account both qualitativeand quantitative factors. Its drawbacks include possible confusions regarding the numerical scalesused in the analysis, as their relationship with the verbal descriptions is not rooted in any theoreticalfoundation [10]. Furthermore, this method forces the decision-maker to choose always one decisionfrom a given set of possible decisions, regardless of whether the decisions offered are acceptable at all.In case they are used, the concept of fuzzy logic is abstract and requires an expert input. Anexpert system is an artificial intelligence technique that uses an input knowledge base and inferenceengine to solve a problem [13]. The knowledge base required by the system is time consuming, and itmay be difficult for experts to express knowledge in terms of specific rules and confidence factors [10].Moreover, the MD companies use a range of other methods to decide which new products are likely toresult in good financial returns, including fewer tangible approaches such as a ‘gut feeling’ based onthe experience in the marketplace [14].Some of above-mentioned methods have problems regarding the specifics of the developmentof an MD [15]. In some cases, an important business reality is ignored. Projects rarely proceed asplanned, and management frequently must adapt and revise future decisions as new informationbecomes available or as uncertainties are resolved. In the case of more complex methods, they canbe as follows. First, people can become overly focused on the numerical precision of the calculationsand the sophistication of the model, instead of on the quality or relevance of the data input into themodel. Second, many managers may feel a little intimidated by the complexity of the techniques.Third, such tools require extra resources and are hence a luxury that only ‘large’ organizations may beable to afford.The purpose of this study is to propose a comprehensive model of the MD development tosubsequently discuss economic evaluation methods as a part of a relevant phase of medical devicedevelopment process. The individual phases are described at a sufficient level of detail so that the ideaof time or financial demands of each phase can be outlined.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 3 of 272. Theoretical Background2.1. MD Development StagesThere is no uniform understanding of the number of phases and their content. For instance,Martin et al. [16] described an MD development lifecycle in these steps: identification of user needs,validation and refinement of the concept, device design, and device evaluation. Panescu [17] proposedthese phases: funding, concept, development, verification and validation, product, and market release.Pietzsch et al. [18] suggested the following phases: initiation, formulation, design and development,final validation and product launch, and post-launch assessment.The basis for the specification of the phases of the development of MD is a research study by ourteam [19] that describes different models differing in the number of specified phases, that is, in therange of 4 to 13 phases, where the contents are similar and sometimes differ from the viewpoint andthe manner of processing. In the studies with a lower frequency of phases, tasks have often been foundas a sub-task of one phase. Only the studies that address all the phases of the development of MDwere selected for further analysis. These studies are as follows: [16,18,20–22]. Overall, their approachcan be summarized in five steps (Figure 1), where each step contains the name of each author andthe phases, the content should be similar. Only [18,22] have differed from other research studies incombining the production of an MD or production and verification.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 3 of 26 2. Theoretical Background 2.1. MD Development Stages There is no uniform understanding of the number of phases and their content. For instance, Martin et al. [16] described an MD development lifecycle in these steps: identification of user needs, validation and refinement of the concept, device design, and device evaluation. Panescu [17] proposed these phases: funding, concept, development, verification and validation, product, and market release. Pietzsch et al. [18] suggested the following phases: initiation, formulation, design and development, final validation and product launch, and post-launch assessment.  The basis for the specification of the phases of the development of MD is a research study by our team [19] that describes different models differing in the number of specified phases, that is, in the range of 4 to 13 phases, where the contents are similar and sometimes differ from the viewpoint and the manner of processing. In the studies with a lower frequency of phases, tasks have often been found as a sub-task of one phase. Only the studies that address all the phases of the development of MD were selected for further analysis. These studies are as follows: [16,18,20–22]. Overall, their approach can be summarized in five steps (Figure 1), where each step contains the name of each author and the phases, the content should be similar. Only [18,22] have differed from other research studies in combining the production of an MD or production and verification.  Figure 1. Review of Medical Device (MD) development stages. Figure 1. Review of Medical Device (MD) development stages.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 4 of 27In terms of the purpose of this study, the findings of the aforementioned studies are considered asa starting point, but the steps of production and deployment are separate. Based on the aforementionedphases from individual authors, the following steps will be taken as a starting point for the developmentof MD:Step1: InitiationStep 2: Concept proposingStep 3: Design and developmentStep 4: Verification and validationStep 5: ProductionStep 6: Market device deploymentIn the literature describing how companies function, many theoretical bases can be found. Theproblem is, however, that the actual functioning of the company is its know-how. The individualphases may differ due to theoretical assumptions, but this is due to the fact that the manufactureronly determines how s/he will manage the business. In addition, only a few studies describe thestages of the development of medical devices in detail, most of which are very brief. Therefore, itis not clear how the individual phases could be priced and the development costs could be pointedout. Furthermore, the situation in the US is different from that in Europe, when the conditions formarketing change in Europe. This is also not addressed in the above studies. In addition, the authorsaim to link the individual phases with their economic evaluation.A survey of the current state of literature, descriptions, and economic models and a comparisonwith the actual processes in the company showed the possibility of extending and innovating thecurrent approach concerning the economic models of the companies.2.2. Economic Evaluation MethodsThe studies can be divided into those using the classical economic indicators and those using thenew age models.The classic economic indicators involve the ratio indicators that assess the company’s performancein terms of profitability, activity, debt, and liquidity. The ratio of relative growth is indicated by theelasticity indicators. The standard financial performance indicators include the absolute value of profit,cash flow (direct, indirect), and profitability indicators. The rate of return indicators assesses the abilityof a company to make a profit by using invested capital. On the time axis, these indicators shouldmanifest an increasing tendency. These indicators include return on assets (ROA), return on equity(ROE), return on sales (ROS), and return on capital employed (ROCE). The traditional indicators are anintegral part of the evaluation of a company’s performance, but they are subject to criticism becausethey do not take into account the risk, the effect of inflation, and the time value of money. Most ofthese classic indicators are based on accounting data and in particular, on the company’s economicresults. The weaknesses of the financial analysis make the results less valuable and less useful.Since the 1980s, performance has begun to be viewed as the ability to create value for owners. Themajor aspects of performance, also the time aspect with respect to expectations of future profits, aswell as the very important influence of risk. Increasingly important are also the indicators of economicvalue added (EVA), discounted cash flow (DCF), market value added (MVA), excess return (ER), andtotal shareholder return (TSR), which are indicators that take into account the goals of other interestedparties, i.e., stakeholders. The new indicators already take into account the impact of inflation, risk,and the cost of capital.Finally, the third and last group is known as new age methods, which are characteristicallyhighly complex but also very specific, hence more efficient, and tend to work with a robust set of data.Korol and Kolodi [23] proposed a fuzzy logic model that uses dynamic financial ratios as input. Sun,Shang et al. [24] worked with the imbalanced financial distress prediction (FDP) based on supportvector machine (SVM) in order to increase the efficiency of the approach as per an imbalanced dataset.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 5 of 27Currently, the most widely used approach is HTA, designed for use specifically in the field of healthtechnologies. This method sets out standards for safety, efficiency, and cost effectiveness in evaluatingmedical device development. HTA purports to provide a framework for decision-making on national,regional, institutional, and individual levels. Despite the usefulness of this framework, there stillremains a challenge of how to adequately evaluate the effectiveness of the technology in question.The literature has suggested that the most common economic method used in the economicevaluation of the MD development is the cost-utility analysis [25–28], followed by the cost-effectivenessanalysis [26,29], and the cost-consequence analysis [27,29]. These findings are consistent with otherstudies on this topic [30,31]. From the point of view of economic indicators, they are a normalcomponent of the profitability, profit, or costs of the ownership ratio. These include, in particular,return on investment (ROI) and total cost of ownership.Formulas for methods with very frequent 
occurrence in the case studies on the evaluation ofmedical, the evaluation of investments, or utilization in the sphere of healthcare are illustrated inTable 1.Table 1. Methods used in the case studies on the evaluation of MD.Purpose Indicator, Type of AnalysisEvaluation of benefits, typically only for technologieswhere the impact on human health and required bylegislation is measured.QALY is the combination of quantity and quality oflife generated by an intervention; One QALY = 1 yearof perfect health, numerically compare the benefitgained from a variety of interventions.Comparison of two solutions in terms of costs for oneyear of QALY.ICER (Calculates the cost to generate one additionalyear of perfect (one QALY) health if usingintervention B in place of intervention A).This is important with respect to the decision ofwhether to start the investment.Industry and investors seeking informed productdevelopment decisions based on health technologyassessment; marketing managers seeking todifferentiate products based on cost-effectiveness;sales managers seeking to articulate the valueproposition of innovative products; R&D managerswishing to integrate health economic considerationsinto new product development systemsCEA—A cost-effectiveness analysis (means ofassessing both the costs and health benefits(measured using a non-monetary indicator) of a newMD Health) [32,33], estimating product value [34].Economic indicators in CEA or CBA [35,36]average annual costsdiscounted costsnet present value and profitability indexinternal yield percentageaverage return (yield)payback timeHealth Technology Assessment for MDCost benefit analysis (CBA)—Transformed to(measured in) money units (e.g., CZK, EUR, USD);Cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA)—Expressed as onefigure in natural units (e.g., number of life-yearssaved, incidence of the disease);Cost-utility analysis (CUA)—Expressed in QALYs(i.e., quality-adjusted life-years);Cost-consequence analysis (CCA)—Listed innatural units.2.3. Legislative EnvironmentIn May 2017, the EU Medical Devices Regulation (MDR) passed by the European Parliament,gave the companies in the MedTech industry from 3 to 5 years to fulfill the compliance criteria set bythe regulation, including establishing new procedures for the marketing approval of newly developedSustainability 2020, 12, 1755 6 of 27products and a reauthorization of the products, already available on the internal market. The goal of thenew regulation was to bring the field of MDs closer to the standards of safety set by the pharmaceuticalindustry and to renew trust in the MedTech industry after the high-profile breast implant scandal andhip replacement failures. The main change in the regulatory framework is the focus on safety, which isto be achieved by strict processes leading to the market authorization and declaration of conformity andobtaining CE marking. The MedTech companies must implement new quality assurance standards tointroduce the unique device identification which allows authorities to trace individual devices throughthe supply chain and simplify recalls in case of emergency situations. The Medtech companies will haveto create the position of a person responsible for regulatory compliance, similar to the pharmaceuticalindustry qualified person, who is responsible for all the aspects of compliance with MDR.Moreover, to obtain the MDR authorization for class III and implantable devices, the MedTechcompanies will be required to present a notified body with a large volume of clinical data that supportsthe clinical performance of their products. Another key factor is the monitoring of device performanceby post-marketing surveillance, similar to the processes used by the pharmaceutical industry [37]. Anadditional aspect is a focus on the strict scrutiny applied to the European notified bodies (NBs). All NBswill have to apply for a joint audit undertaken by a local competent authority, another member statecompetent authority, and European Commission representative and must demonstrate proficiency inand adherence to quality management systems.This stricter scrutiny is leading to a decline in such entities. Under the previous medical devicesdirectives (MDD), there were over 80 NBs. The number declined to circa 50 in October 2017, andas of 1st of January 2020 (fewer than 150 days to the date of application of MDR), there are only 9notified bodies already accredited according to MDR and further reduction is anticipated [38]. InDecember 2019, the second corrigendum to the MDR was approved, which granted a transient periodfor newly established classes Is (sterile), Ir (reusable), and Im (with measuring function) devices,allowing manufacturers and NB to focus more on the recertification of higher class products. But thereis still a great threat to the Small and Medium sized Enterprises manufacturing legacy devices, whichstems from the provision of MDR that banish grandfathering of devices approved under the MDD,without providing sufficient clinical data for conformity assessment process.The major problem from the MDR implementation is in the field of innovation. The majority ofinnovative research in the field of MDs is not undertaken by big companies but depends on the small-to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which stems from a cooperation of healthcare professionalswith their local “garage” companies or off-spin labs of universities. There are about 25,000 MedTechenterprises in Europe, and 95% of them are SMEs [39,40]. These types of enterprises are at the greatestrisk of leaving the market because the administrative costs will be almost unbearable for them. Suchcompanies are usually focused on the production of a small number of products, and their margin doesnot allow them to pay for all the necessary costs connected with the compliance to MDR. The estimatedcosts for the small- to medium-sized enterprises to launch a new class III MD will be between EUR1 and 4 million or EUR 7 to 28 million if the device must fulfill the requirements of the centralizedpre-market authorization procedure. The more serious scrutiny will affect approximately 10% to20% of class III products [40]. In the near future, a diminishing portfolio of available MDs would beobserved, especially in the field of lifesaving implants or generally class III devices. It will followfrom the stakeholders’ reluctance to large-scale investment to ensure the compliance with MDR, whenassessment may predict that the investment in such technology may not pay off on future productsales. This will lead to the orphaning of some groups of patients, some with critical conditions. Inthis particular field, measures similar to the Orphan Drug Regulation (Regulation (Ec) No 141/2000 OfThe European Parliament And Of The Council of 16 December 1999, on orphan medicinal products)for MD development, which establish stimulations for their research, development, and marketing,should be implemented.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 7 of 273. MethodsThe study design is based on two main steps. The first step is to analyze and compare the availablesteps of the development of MD to set a basis for the phases of the medical device development thatwill be appraised later as part of the economic methods [41]. In addition, the model design and itsverification will be performed.3.1. Analysis and Comparison of Available MD Development Phases and Investment Evaluation MethodsIn the beginning, the identification of critical steps was based on the analysis and comparison ofthe available medical device development stages in the professional studies to set the basis for thedevelopment of MD [19], which will be appraised later as part of the economic methods.3.2. Evaluation of the Stage Investment ModelThe following steps must be conducted to develop, revise, and improve the suggested MDinvestment model:(a) The preliminary assessment of the MD investment practices and procedures from seveninterviewees who actively cooperate with researchers (5) and companies (2).(b) The detection of the team members involved in the evaluation of prospective investments.The authors conducted close qualitative interviews because of the broad variety of activitiesinvolved in the MD development process. The survey questionnaire for the complex background ofeight questions was sent to seven experts experienced in the MD development process. There was afollow-up, 1-hour, long-distance interview. The questionnaire consisted of multiple choice YES or NOquestions that explored the validity of linking a few engineering and management features duringthe design optimization. In addition, the options of low, medium, and high were provided to obtaininsight into the feasibility of the combination of engineering and product development features.The semi-structured face-to-face interviews with employees of the Top management are one ofthe basic sources of information for a comprehensive evaluation of return on investment in the MDdevelopment. The interview questionnaire was based on the principles of intervention logic [42]and contained 12 evaluation questions. The interviewers asked the respondents according to theprepared questionnaire and usually asked further questions, which expanded and supplementedthe range of monitored problems. The draft of the questionnaire was commented within the projectteam and cooperated research from other Czech universities who actively develop medical devices attheir workplaces. The interviews with the TOP management staff began in February 2019 and endedin March 2019. A total of six interviews were conducted. The interviews were conducted in twocompanies Ella-CS, Ltd., Tesla Medical and Mediatrade Ltd. with people in the position of businessowner, executive director, sales representative, development director, head of economic department,regulatory expert. The interviews were conducted by 1–2 experienced members of the evaluation teamand a written record was made from each interview into the prepared record sheet. The respondentsresponded willingly and honestly, and in many cases, they supported their comments with a numberof facts and information.Criteria for selecting experts was based on the professional background they have in thefield of medical devices and in relation to their present competencies. In terms of model andverification/evaluation of its purpose in business practice in the context of the company’s visionand strategy, the company owners were selected. For discussion and determination of involvedeconomic methods and their suitability—head of economic department. The development directorand regulatory expert were then asked to evaluate the relevance of the specification of the stages ofmedical device development. Sales representative and executive director were chosen to verify clarityand the possibility of transferring the model to types of medical devices and different markets.It was one woman (head of economic department) and five men. The interview took place in Czech.In the first case, it took place in the seat of Ella-CS, Ltd., in the second case it was held at the UniversitySustainability 2020, 12, 1755 8 of 27of Hradec Kralove. The logic of the interpretation of the interview results is organized according to theapproved concept of evaluation questions and the results from the analysis of respondents’ answerswere assigned. The evaluation questions and subsequently, the evaluation of the whole interview wasdivided into six thematic blocks.(1) Description of the process—the first block of questions focused on the fact of how the processesof the medical device development are set up and registered, whether there is a methodology in thecompany, how and for whom it is available, to which stages they divide processes, what the level ofcompletion is, what partial actions are cost-related, and to what extent details.(2) Impact of the affected technology on the process—in the next stage, more attention was paid tothe differences in the risk class of the medical device. The questions again concerned the developmentof the medical device, the linking of the development phases of the medical device to the risk class (I,II, III) (Table A1) and the associated costs; legislative changes awaiting the Czech Republic—transitionto the new MDR of the European Commission, what it means for companies, what strategy theyare considering.(3) Evaluation of the investment effects on the process—the third block of questions focused onvariants/ business models and target groups.(4) Investment costs.(5) Potential cost savings and potential risks.(6) Calculation of return—use of financial indicators by companies and their involvement in thedevelopment of medical devices (types of financial indicators, the time of product on the market is/isnot taken into account, or involvement of qualitative factors such as loss of novelty).The assessment and improvement of the proposed model were performed on the basis of theprovided feedback from the respondents. This process was performed in the form of proposals andappeals for change. If there were appeals for smaller modifications, they were conducted immediatelyin each phase to be once again evaluated by the interviewees. If there were serious appeals forchange, they were conducted after the completion of each phase and upon the mutual agreementamong the respondents. If there were no appeals for change, the interviewees were asked to confirma full agreement with the presented model. The results of the interviews are in addition to thetime-consuming steps to better illustrate the concept of the activities. Upon the improvement andmodification of the MD investment process, a quick pre-assessment checklist was developed on thebasis of the respondents’ responses. Although this checklist was not the primary goal, it can form anauxiliary instrument, potentially valuable for new life-science investors. The interviews followed theaforementioned methodology and were mainly based on [18]. Nevertheless, the authors of this studyadjusted it to develop a framework, especially useful for the investors.4. Results4.1. Phases and Processes of the Model of the Medical Device DevelopmentFirst, all phases related to the specifics of the development of MDs and their investment arereflected in the formula for calculating the economic indicators; then, the required investment efficiencycan be assessed. The starting points are therefore initiation, concept proposing, design and development,verification and validation, production and market device deployment. The complexity model for theeconomic evaluation of MDs was established as the Model of the Medical Device Development basedon Economic Evaluation (MedDee).The above-mentioned setting of the stages of development of medical devices is based on mappingthe current state of knowledge and knowledge from business practice in the Czech Republic. Based onthe theoretical background, the initial model was designed and phases of the model were designed.After the interviews were conducted, feedback and information on the suitability of the set phaseswere obtained. Furthermore, information was needed on the need to specify a certain level of detail,so that it did not affect the differences that relate to different types of medical devices. InformationSustainability 2020, 12, 1755 9 of 27was therefore obtained on the appropriateness of the level of detail, the phases, the involvement ofeconomic methods, the sustainability of the method in the context of changing legislative conditions.Regulatory experts have also helped illustrate the changes that will affect companies in the comingyears and how they should affect the ideals of medical device development.For example, the chief executive of a selected company stated, “at each stage of the developmentprocess, the cost estimates are being refined and the next steps are adjusted. At each stage, it is againdecided whether or not the development continues. Therefore, the cost of a person registering partialactivities under the methodology must be taken into account at each stage”.Regarding regulatory, the responsible person states “it will be crucial in the future to adjust themethods and the possibility of automatic cost consideration at the time of product launch, when clinicaltrials and more will be needed in selected risk classes”.The responsible person for 
the economic part also stated that within the company, they counton “about a 3% decrease in the value of the product in the post-market time and is always taken intoaccount in our calculations”.Findings from interview are therefore reflected in the phases specified below.4.1.1. InitiationIn the first initiation phase of MedDee, the customer’s needs are identified, as well as the answer tothe question: “Is my product a MD?” “Part of this stage is also the initial description of the functionalityand intended use, the benefit compared with the existing solutions, the analysis of competing products,the initial estimate of development costs (including directive), revenues, and financing”, said thedevelopment director during the interview.The verification of the formerly detected clinical needs may include discussions with doctors,end-users, or patients. Furthermore, this stage comprises a review of the existing MDs and procedures.Other activities that must be considered are as follows: an initial market analysis, financial review, andcompetitive product evaluation. The reviews of the existing IP landscape within a specific market orpathology area and technology risk evaluation are performed.As it has been mentioned before, the first of the input parameters must be to integrate the productinto a group according to a specific rule. Table 1 describes how the individual rules are passed betweenthe classes. The list of codes and corresponding types of devices for the purpose of specifying the scopeof the designation as NBs in the field of medical devices under Regulation (EU) MDR 2017/745 [43] areas follows:• Active implantable devices;• Active non-implantable devices for imaging, monitoring and/or diagnosis;• Active non-implantable therapeutic devices and general active non-implantable devices;• Non-active implants and long-term surgically invasive devices;• Non-active, non-implantable devices;• Specifics of MDs;• Technologies for MDs—auditing.This division does not depend on the risk class. The medical device regulation divides MDs intoclasses I, Is, Im, Ir, IIa, IIb, and III and a special category of custom-made medical devices, taking intoaccount the intended purpose and risk (Table 2). The MDR classification system does not radicallydiffer from the MDD, although it is better to consider the level of invasiveness and level of toxicity.Some new rules were added. The classification rules, which are based on the vulnerability of thehuman body, should take into account the potential risks associated with the technical design andmanufacturing of the devices [43].Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 10 of 27Table 2. Relation of the MD types and classification rules.MD according to the Risk Classification RulesClass I—“Provided all of low risk medical devices (class I) or sterile(class Is) and/or have a measuring function (low/medium risk classIm) or reusable low risk devices (Class Ir), which are placed on themarket in sterile condition, have a measuring function or arereusable surgical instruments: Assessment of the technicaldocumentation relating only to those specific features of the device,e.g., sterility, measurement or reprocessing.”Rules: 1–2, 4–6, 10–11, 13Class IIa (medium risk) Class IIa devices: “Assessment of thetechnical documentation for at least one representative device foreach category of devices”.Rules: 2–8, 10–12, 17, 19–21Class IIb (medium/high risk) Class IIb “implantable devices (exceptsutures, staples, dental filings, dental braces, tooth crowns, screws,wedges, plates, wires, pins, clips and connectors), and class IIb activedevices intended to administer and/or remove a medicinal product:Assessment of the technical documentation for every device. Allother class IIb devices: Assessment of the technical documentationfor at least one representative device per generic device group”.Rules: 2–12, 15–16, 19–21Class III (high risk) Class III devices: “Assessment of the technicaldocumentation for every device”. Rules: 2–3, 6–9, 14–15, 18–22Note: Full text of the rules in Appendix A, Source: Based on [43].Already in the first phase, an initial economic evaluation of the planned development was to bedesigned and carried out. It should be done as follows:- setting an appropriate time horizon for the economic evaluation;- identification of all types of resources needed for the use of technology and comparators;- calculation of the unit costs of each resource and the total costs of public health insurance and;- costs from a societal perspective;- indicate the costs that have implications for non-medical budgets (generally social costs).4.1.2. Concept ProposalThe second stage of MedDee consists of a design and development plan; a product specification;its functions, size, material, packaging, and production concept; and a schedule and implementationteam. A cross-functional team is set up to formulate a concept, assess device feasibility, and develop adesign plan and a timeline of the whole project. The team consists of the principal experts of R&D,quality assurance, production, marketing/sales, regulatory, clinical, and legal entities.In terms of specific activities, the design requirements plan, product requirement specification,production concept, project plan, risk management plan, clinical evaluation concept and post-marketingclinical follow up (PMCF), business registration plan requirements, and personnel assurancerequirements are often developed.At this stage, the CEA or CBA method should already be carefully elaborated so that it is clearwhat costs and especially the benefits, which can often be of a qualitative nature, can be expected andhow they will be translated into financial statements. These data should be continuously updated inthe next stages to provide a complete basis for the development of the HTA at the end of development,as it is likely to be mandatory in most EU countries in the coming years. The calculations and theirupdates shall provide evidence for:For which disease/health problem/potential health problem the technology should be used.Experts in the field of business evaluation should answer questions such as:How is the disease/ health problem is currently diagnosed, how is it treated, how should itbe diagnosed and treated according to the published procedures, what are the other alternativesSustainability 2020, 12, 1755 11 of 27to the technology in question, and what are the differences in the treatment of the disease in theirdifferent phases?How will the use of technology affect the overall quality of life?What are the risks of using the technologies, their frequency, severity and duration, dose-relatedor cumulative-dose relationship?What is the investment needed to use the technology in question, what extra space, what otherequipment and supplies are needed? What type of data records is required to track the use of technologyand what registers are needed to monitor its use?4.1.3. Design and DevelopmentAfter the activities performed in Phase 2, the product is ready for the conversion—from conceptto development. The market opportunity is already identified. In terms of both regulators and theIRP, risks are acceptable. The MD has a specified class and is included in the company strategy.During this stage, the verification and validation tests before and after the design freeze Phases IIIand IV of MedDee are performed. The verification and validation studies including their methodsof documentation are checked. The proper documentation is a must from a regulatory perspectivebecause all scientific studies must be reproducible. The patent review process also persists in Phase III,or even in Phase II. The reimbursement policy of the MD is set in Phase III, because reimbursementcodes and part numbers are assigned to the new device.“The activities connected with the design are as follows”, said the development director:• “Product design, design verification, and validation (determination of the tests to be carried outbefore and after the design freeze).• Regulatory—verification of the protection of the technology, and possibly specification ofaccompanying documentation”.The activities connected with the development are as follows:• Purchase and validation strategy (technical solutions to fulfil customer requirements, specificationof all key parameters’ specifications, design of production technologies, materials design,supplier decisions).• Regulatory (post market clinical follow up (PMCF) plan, post-performance qualification, clinicalevaluation plan).• Risk management design failure mode and effects analysis (dFMEA), update advanced failuremodes and effects analysis (aFMEA).• Technical specifications, block diagram, eclectic diagram, detailed design hardware(HW), software(SW), mechanical design, prototype.• Testing.The individual tests, their time requirements, and the price vary according to the safety class andMD type (Table 3).Electromagnetic compatibility according to IEC 60601-1-2 is measured in accredited laboratoriesin three steps: electrical resistance, radiation, and electrostatic charge. The tests are not demanding;however, they can last up to 1 year if one of the tests fails. Then, the manufacturer has to modifyhis/her prototype or existing product until it passes the test. Otherwise, at the next supervisory audit,s/he loses the certificate and the CE mark. This is an electrical MD. The verification of safety (electricalsafety) according to IEC 60601-1-1 and any other standards standardized for the type of MD (fans,neuro-stimulators, pacemakers, . . . , all from the IEC 60601-2 series of standards) is performed. Thetests are performed, respective measurements, which should confirm that if the manufacturer hasa value of 30 at the output, it should be true. Many tests are measured by the testing facility byits devices, which the manufacturer carries out only for his/her MD. The tests can last for up to 1year: the MD is tested and everything is compared with the documentation: manual, risk analysis,Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 12 of 27and usability. Therefore, the testing sometimes takes a long time. Most commonly, a type test isconducted to confirm the safety of the product. The manufacturer performs this test or performs thistest under electrical safety. The manufacturer conducts this test to ensure that when the device is inthe test room, everything will work. For these tests, it is necessary to provide a measuring device tocreate conditions that can be possibly applied at the output inspection and test each device before itis sold. The test can be conducted within 1 or 2 months by the company. In addition, a biologicalevaluation, the safety assessment of the product according to ISO 10993, is conducted. This includestests in laboratories to determine if the MD is biologically safe for the patient. The three basic testsare cytotoxicity, sensitization, and irritation. The sensitization, like delayed irritation, is tested for 1or 2 months. In the beginning, a preclinical evaluation is required to demonstrate its state of the artalong with the underlying theory. This document has to prove that the intended principle is safe, atleast theoretically. Further extent of clinical evaluation is established based on this document; if asimilar MD is already on the market, a clinical trial may be conducted or similarity can be assessed,or the clinical data may be evaluated. When it is a completely new method, the whole preclinical(laboratory, animal model) and clinical evaluation must be conducted. This process may take 1 to2 years, according to the number of patients, the complexity of the method, or the principle. Onceall the tests are completed, the results are processed and applied to the clinical evaluation with theinformation describing the clinical relevance of the MD. After that, this information is passed to thespecialist, the clinician, or the general practitioner who reads it, evaluates it, and writes or signs thefinal clinical trial report. This report is attached to the conformity assessment. The processing ofall documentation without clinical trials lasts for about 90 days. As aforementioned, a more precisespecification of activities is then linked to a specific type of MD.Table 3. Examples of the time-consuming mandatory tests for class IIb of MD.TESTING 1 TIME PRICEEMC 90 days EUR 5200Electrical safety 180 days EUR 6000Type test 180 days EUR 6000Biological evaluation 90–120 days EUR 10,000Preclinical evaluation 40 days EUR 2000 (worker’s salary per 2 months)Clinical evaluation Up to 360 daysCZK 50,000–10,000 (annual clinical trial, 100patients, device IIa, CZK 8 mil., in the case of aclinical trial based on the use of its own clinicaldata, CZK 50,000 per worker’s salary for 2 months)Verification and validation 60 days CZK 60,000Note: 1: Average time and money for class IIb, case study based on the conditions for the Czech Republic.4.1.4. Verification and ValidationPhase IV of MedDee is characterized by the creation of formal design prints, final productverification and validation, sales launch preparation, and regulatory approval. Most of the steps fromPhase III continues and is completed. Material specifications, packaging drawings, and marking andlabelling specifications are finalized, and several sales and marketing activities must occur prior tothe launch of a new MD. In addition, all of the aforementioned electrical safety and ElectromagneticCompatibility (EMC) tests are conducted. The price and time may vary, depending on whether thedevice has been tested earlier in the laboratory, or whether it is a brand-new type, or whether it is thesame type from a generic range of products that just has a display instead of a button.Another key process is the conformity assessment process, which is one of the necessary conditionsfor placing a product on the market and can be generally labelled as a sequence of operations in aunique structure for a particular product group. The conformity assessment procedures are divisible toSustainability 2020, 12, 1755 13 of 27modules related to the product design phase and the manufacturing phase, and the product is generallyassessed in both of these phases. Sometimes, the assessment can already start in Phase II. Basic modulescan be used in multiple phases, in relation to a given product group. Clinical evaluation can be madeas an essential equivalence between devices. The conformity assessment process, including the ECdeclaration of conformity or other related procedures, needs not be performed by the importer forproducts bearing the CE mark and for which a demonstrable conformity assessment has been carriedout in accordance with the relevant technical legislation of the EU Member State. The time and financialdemands for a selected group of MDs in the Czech Republic are shown in Table 4 and are comparedwith the data of the US consultant group Emergo by UL, which estimates costs for the approval for theUS companies.Table 4. Time and financial demands of the conformity assessment process (expert’s estimation of pricesand conditions of the Czech Republic) compared to Emergo by UL estimates for the US customers.Conformity Assessment Time Price Complexity PriceCZE Estimate US estimateClass I 1 EUR 4500–13500Class Ir, Is, Im 360 days EUR 6000 2 EUR 13,500–27,000Class IIa 3 EUR 27,000–45,000Class IIb 480 days EUR 14,000–20,000 4 EUR 45,000+Class III 5 EUR 45,000+It should be noted that both estimations presume that the manufacturer has the quality managementsystem (QMS) already in place and validated and did not take into account cost associated with itsmaintenance, because it is considered as a fixed cost for a manufacturer.4.1.5. Production“In the production phase of MedDee, it is essential to verify the status of all the activities carriedout so far”, said the development director. In the area of risk, it is a review of the timeliness of the riskplan, the dFMEA update, the aFMEA update, a design verification report, and a design validationreport. Furthermore, in the regulatory field, a review of accompanying documentation, acceptance ofaccompanying documentation, and application for the CE marking is carried out. At the end of thisphase, it is verified that the product fulfils the customer requirements, regulators, and IPR and is readyfor the release on the market. The risk management process has 
already been reviewed, and dFMEAand pFMEA are accepted. Additionally, the application for the CE marking has been filed. Onceawarded, the mark is sent to the national authority, the national administration body that registersthese types of MDs. The application for the conformity assessment has also been submitted.In this phase, the early health technology assessment has been suggested in the context of iterativeeconomic evaluation alongside phase I and II clinical research to provide information about clinicaltrial design, market access, and pricing [9]. Within its framework, the results should be calculatedbased on:- determination of all direct and indirect costs for the rated technology and comparators, a summaryof the costs related to public health insurance;- benefits for the rated technology and comparators;- the resulting ICER value in terms of the costs of the public health insurance payer and then alsoof the society-wide perspective, taking into account all direct and indirect costs;- direct costs of the patient and his/her family (out of pocket money, co-payments). Although thesecosts are included in the ICER calculation from a societal perspective, their amount may influencethe decision on the cost-effectiveness of the technology or the amount of the patient’s supplement;- sensitivity analyzes.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 14 of 274.1.6. Market Device DeploymentAs part of the last step of the product deployment, the marketing objectives set out in thebusiness plans must be monitored, with market launches. The post-market surveillance (PMS) andpost-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) studies are available. Terrain and production data are collectedand evaluated. Feedback from physicians and a vigilance system are already set, that is, follow-up andreporting of adverse events and the post-marketing follow-up process, which should regulate clinicalevaluation and risk analysis and improve and optimize the product. But when it comes to the effectiveadjustment, the main benefit of PMS is that if the manufacturer knows, or at least has an idea of whatto focus on, clinical trials can be skipped in the future. The clinical trials are the equivalent of clinicaldata, and the manufacturer can acquire them thanks to the properly configured PMS processes whileselling his/her product on the market.From the point of view of the development stages of the medical device, the role of the useris becoming increasingly important for several reasons; firstly, in the development phase, where,due to the competitive environment, manufacturers must know and take into account their needsfrom the start, and secondly, in the development and marketing phase, where clinical safety testingwill be part of the new legislation. At the moment it can be stated that the inclusion of users in thedevelopment of medical devices is gaining in importance. Thus, it can be stated that involving usersis limited or underreported in the published literature. This underreporting could be due to eithercommercial confidentiality or indeed a failure to recognize the importance of users as a whole. Inaddition, the limited practice of involving users could be due to the financial and time constraints,which manufacturers face, as well as a tradition of discretionary involvement of users [21,44].The overview of the phases and the activities described is shown in Table 5. Many activitiesthroughout the development process are performed simultaneously. Setting up a system descriptionis independent of the production of the technical documentation that develops to the moment ofsubmission to the notified body for the conformity assessment. The product launch time in the case ofelectrical MD, design, and development up to a functional prototype can take up to 2 years, at least,including laboratory tests.As there are certain types of costs incurred at each step of the development of health-care products,while further development steps are being refined, the effectiveness of development is continuallytested. Therefore, it is essential to use and match economic methods including benefits for patients, asit is currently anchored in the development of new drugs. The introduction of the HTA method as acompulsory part of the medical device assessment is discussed at the pan-European level.4.2. Economic Methods of Investment Efficiency Evaluation for Individual Stages of MD DevelopmentEach stage of development includes verification and ongoing review of investment effectiveness,specifying the return on investment calculation and ongoing verification of the decision to marketthe product in relation to a specific business model. Table 6 describes the methods at each stage, theeconomic indicators included in the selected methods, and the link to the stage where it is appropriateto specify the calculation.The integration of complex methods into the individual stages of MD development and theirupdating is a time-consuming activity, however, in relation to the changing legislative environment, itis likely to be a necessary or even mandatory part in the future.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 15 of 27Table 5. Phases of MD development and activities in all phases.Initiation Concept Proposing Design and Development Verification and Validation Production Market Device DeploymentIs myproductMD?Time schedule Patentsearch Patent industrial designSelection ofproject’s team Management of MDSpecification ofthe product Risk analysis according to ISO/GMPSpecification ofthe production Quality management system—GMP/ISOSpecification ofthe Regulatory VIGILANCE/CAPA systemPost-market surveillance/Post-MarketClinical Follow-upValidation/Verification according to QMSTechnical FileRisk analysis according to design of the productDesign Testing EMCSafety testsBiologicalevaluationPreclinicalevaluation Clinical evaluationValidation/Verification according to technicalspecificationDOCUMENTATION—User Manual/Usability/Clinical evaluation/Testreport/Risk analysis/Labelling/Packaging/PMCF/PMS/CAPAEconomicsmethods CEA/QALY/ICER update of CEA/CBA parameters; early stage HTA HTASustainability 2020, 12, 1755 16 of 27Table 6. Proposal of the intersection of the development stages of medical devices and economicmethods for the continuous evaluation of investment efficiency.Phase Economic MethodsInitiationComparison of the current situation and the new solution,specification of all benefits and costs, within the general CBAmethod, transfer of qualitative benefits to quantitative expression(substitute market methods, shadow prices, hedonic prices, labormarket analysis.Depending on the type of medical device (if relevant), a morespecific CEA method may be considered. A cost-effectivenessanalysis, especially for higher risk classes, should include oneQALY calculation, i.e., health if using new intervention/ newtechnology in place of the original technology.This is a period of preparatory work in which the project is beingprepared and decides on its implementation or rejection. In termsof cash flows, this usually includes the costs of projectdocumentation, administrative costs of project preparation, costsof processing economic studies, and costs of evaluating theeffectiveness of the investment plan itself.The content of this phase is in any case the initial calculation ofdynamic and static economic indicators as part of the CBA.In the case of instrumentation (i.e., risk class III), it is advisable touse the HTA concept, which includes the assessment of societalimpacts, i.e., the CBA method.Concept proposing Update of benefits and costs, conversion to financial statements,use of economic indicators: average annual costs, discounted costs,net present value and profitability index, internal rate of return,average profitability (return), payback period.Design and developmentVerification and validationProductionMarket device deploymentFinal HTA/ CBA calculation with real cost information.Calculation of sensitivity analysis to identify cash flow scenarioswhere its approach may be as follows: characterization of factorsaffecting cash flows, change of each factor by a certain percentageand for each change separately calculation of new indicator value,calculation of change of resulting criterion indicator.At present, in many European countries, health technology assessments are often carried out ata late stage of its life cycle, only 5–10 years after the product has entered the market, which may beirrelevant to the health system. This suggests that it would be appropriate to focus on the evaluation ofthe device in the early stages, i.e., in the first years since the launch, including the implementationof the early stage HTA. HTA brings the possibility of a social perspective as a supporting tool forevaluation. Although healthcare or welfare systems are not fully interconnected in many countries,information on costs and benefits in the broadest possible sense (both direct and indirect) can be takeninto account and seen in the health system, welfare system, patient family, or national economy. Giventhe existing reimbursement systems, it is advisable to include the views of both stakeholders and takeinto account their objectives when deciding to support the selected medical technology.“In the economic analysis, it is important to evaluate all the resources that are consumed whencombining the effect of using the technology in question to address the given health problem” said theeconomic director. Possible costs are generally divided into direct medical, direct non-medical, andindirect in the HTA area (Table 7). The costs from public and private sources are evaluated so that it ispossible to cover the whole society aspect of the benefit of the technology in question.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 17 of 27Table 7. Type of costs.Direct costsNon-medical costsTime spent on the patient and his/her family—time spenton unpaid work (e.g., housework), performed by thepatient or the family providing care.Medical costsDirect costs of the patient and his/her family—amountspaid by the patient (including surcharges) for drugs,medical devices, dental care, home care services.Transport costs, nursing costs. Premiums paid to privateinsurance companies and premiums paid by them.Costs of public health insurance.Drugs, medical devices and aids, diagnostic, therapeutic,rehabilitation, spa, screening and preventive health carecovered by the general health insurance fund.Prevention Fund of Public Health Insurance Companies.Direct costs of the health system financed from otherpublic sourcesCosts of the state budget, budget of regions, towns andmunicipalities for the health system, which are thus paidoutside the system of public health insurance.Non-direct costsIndirect costs of social security paid sickness benefits,pensions, care allowances.Productivity costs—loss of productivity due to thereduced work capacity, short or long term absence atwork. Costs incurred by employers for recruiting andtraining a worker to replace a patient.4.3. Qualitative Investigation—Evaluation of the Proposed Meddee ModelIn summary, the results of the interviews focused on feedback on the proposed model in thecontext of current business practice are described in Table 8.Traditional concept approach describes how the situation and area is solved in the corporateenvironment now. Specifically, it is an expression of attitudes to the current setting of methodologiesof the development stages in the company, the use of economic indicators, or to the lack of proceduresat the theoretical level. “New concept approach” contains the statement of respondents in relation tothe proposed methodology and the involvement of economic indicators in the given area, evaluationin relation to the current state of business.Table 8. Evaluation of a new approach within a qualitative interview.Thematic Area Traditional ConceptApproach/Current State New Concept Approach—MeddeeDescription of theprocessThere is a methodology for thedevelopment of medical devices in oneof the companies.There is nothing like this in anothercompany, the initial idea is an estimateof costs and development time, theexpected return is calculated, no othermethods are used.At present in the MPS, in the CzechRepublic often dealt with randomly,within the procedure of the given deviceand its development, a generalizedmethodology often does not exist.Setting and specification of stages ofdevelopment of medical devices,determination of activities in each stage,and related types of costs is consideredbeneficial, it is necessary to specify inpractice, it is a suitable input and startingpoint for setting up in the company.It is a possibility to specify the estimates, forreal practice it would be appropriate toautomate processes, list other individualtasks, go to a high level of detail.Sustainability 2020, 12, 1755 18 of 27Table 8. Cont.Thematic Area Traditional ConceptApproach/Current State New Concept Approach—MeddeeImpact of the affectedtechnology on theprocessFrom the point of view of businesspractice, there is currently nocustomized methodology in place forthe risk classes of a medical device orother technology breakdown,everything is modified in relation to anew idea, innovative solutions.From the theory point of view,approaches are available, specifying thephases of resource development,focusing on the activities within each ofthem, the focus lies, again with minimallinkage to the type of technology.The model is beneficial from the point ofview of the simultaneous transition to newlegislation on new medical devices, takinginto account risk classes, cost links relatedto increased registration fees.To some extent, MedDee tries to capture thenature of the solution, the type oftechnology. This aspect is essential forconsidering different business models.Evaluation of theinvestment effects onthe process• In financing decisions, differentbusiness models are considered inrelation to the target group and themethod of financing, both being a keyinput for calculating the return.• In terms of economic methods, basicprofitability indicators or break-evenpoint calculations are included. It isfound to be sufficient.Evaluation of the investment includesconsideration of all possible forms of sales,including the possibility of productmodification in relation to the target group(medical facility or individualized solutionfor users). This area is marginally presentedin the model and in the individual phases.The work on the business model itself isvery complex, different in relation to thetarget country, legislative conditions offinancing. It is one of the key places, itopens up an area that could be addressed inthe future, there is also an interest fromcompanies, to contribute, and then to use allthe analyzed data.Setting up a more detailed description ofthe economic methods involved isapplicable, close to business practice, to therequirements of approval authorities.Potential cost savingsand potential risksThe level of the current state of businesspractice is such that the area is dealtwith in a relatively heterogeneous way,in most Czech companies on the basis ofbasic economic indicators of return orcalculation of the break-even point.From the point of view of theory, it isnot often solved within the frameworkof economic efficiency.The situation is different when dealingwith a risk issue where aspects relatedto the risk class are dealt withintensively, in particular at the level ofapproval authorities.The proposed methods make it possible tocompare the new solution with theexisting one.Along with the setting of new legislativeconditions, it can be expected that pressurewill be increased to systematically specifyand evaluate savings and risks in relation tothe new product.Calculation of returnDifferent types of rentability indicators,more complex indicators are notusually used.More complex evaluation methods(CBA/CEA, HTA) are included in the newmodel, but they are not addressed in termsof business practice.Given the ongoing legislative changes, itcan be assumed that even more complexevaluations will become more and morepart of business practice.From the above text, it is obvious that the proposed method of assessing the developmentof medical devices is understandable, but in current business practice, this level of detail is notmethodologically discussed. Some phases are solved 