Drafting 'better regulation": The economic cost of regulatory complexity

ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.comScienceDirectDrafting “better regulation”: The economic costof regulatory complexityJuan de Lucio ∗,1, Juan S. Mora-SanguinettiUniversidad de Alcalá and Banco de España-Eurosystem, SpainReceived 12 May 2021; received in revised form 5 September 2021; accepted 20 October 2021AbstractDifferent public agencies are seeking to draft “better regulation”. Complex or poorly drafted norms aremore difficult for economic agents to implement, tending to erode economic efficiency. The literature hasso far concentrated on the analysis of regulatory complexity as a phenomenon related to the “quantity”of norms. This article guides the process of adopting new regulations, taking into account that normscan also be complex due to new “qualitative” reasons such as linguistic ambiguity or relational structure(references between legal documents). To perform the analysis, we develop new indicators for legibility andregulatory interconnectedness. Specifically, we construct a new database (RECOS – REgulation COmplexityin Spain) by extracting information from 8171 norms (61 million words) which comprise the regulations ofall the Spanish Autonomous regions. Our analysis reveals the relationship between measures of “qualitative”complexity and relevant economic (productivity) and institutional (judicial efficacy) variables. This research The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to the Banco de España or the Eurosystem.We would like to thank the editor and the referees of this journal for their valuable suggestions and comments. We arealso grateful for the suggestions of the participants in the seminars of the Banco de España – Eurosystem, the OECD, theBank of England, the 8th International meeting in Law & Economics, Université Paris-Nanterre, the GCD-University ofA Coruña, the FIDE Foundation and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. We also thank the comments and suggestions ofan anonymous reviewer who evaluated the working paper version of this article (published as DT 2107 of the Banco deEspaña-Eurosystem).∗ Corresponding author.E-mail address: Juan.deLucio@UAH.es (J. de Lucio).1 Juan de Lucio acknowledges the financial support from Comunidad de Madrid & UAH (ref: EPU-INV/2020/006) andComunidad de Madrid (H2019/HUM-5761).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpolmod.2021.10.0030161-8938/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The Society for Policy Modeling. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Please cite this article as: J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti, Drafting “better reg-ulation”: The economic cost of regulatory complexity, Journal  of  Policy  Modeling,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpolmod.2021.10.003ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxshows that the new dimensions of regulatory complexity matter, yield significant results and should be takeninto account in governments’ “better regulation” policies.© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of The Society for Policy Modeling. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).JEL classification: O43; K2; R11; O47Keywords: Regulatory complexity; Productivity; Linguistic complexity; Relational complexity; Legal corpus1.  IntroductionSince the 1990s, different national administrations and international organizations have beenpursuing various initiatives aimed at achieving “better regulation”. The aim is to draft regulationsthat are more efficient and less “complex” to use both for private agents (citizens and compa-nies) and for public agencies themselves. “Better regulation” policies save money and time, andtherefore have better economic features.It is worth mentioning, among others, the “plainlanguage.gov” initiative in the USA launchedin 1994 and promoted again in 2004, the UK “Good Law” principles of 2013 [see also, Officeof the Parliamentary Counsel (Cabinet Office) (2013)], the OECD recommendations of 2012(OECD, 2012), or different initiatives of the European Union, which have been transmitted tonational regulations. In the case of Spain, it is worth going back to the 1997 Government Act andhighlighting the recent Royal Decree 931/2017 (Mora-Sanguinetti, 2019a).Many of these initiatives seek to get legislators to reflect on whether drafting a new regulationis really necessary and encourage policy makers to draft the new norms as clearly as possible.However, in order to make the drafting process really efficient and have sufficient support, there isstill a lack of more academic work reflecting on the circumstances that make the regulation havenegative impacts. More work is also needed to be able to objectify and quantify the “complexity”of regulation. This research thus rationalizes the efforts of public administrations to achieve “betterregulation”.As an introduction, it is first necessary to reflect on the nature and effects of regulation ingeneral. In this sense, it can be stated that regulation, as part of the institutional framework,is fundamental to economic development2 . If it is well designed, it can help to mitigate marketfailures, such as imperfect information or externalities, and can generally reduce transaction costs3.However, regulation is often perceived in a negative light, because if norms are poorly drafted,they could lead to increased transaction costs, which impact negatively on economic efficiency.Hence the “better regulation” initiatives are aimed at reducing the negative impacts of regulation.The analysis and quantification of these drafting or design problems are precisely the objective2 Nedic et al. (2020) show that excessive and complicated regulation does not favor the quality of institutions and finda significant and positive impact from Regulatory Quality on economic growth. In another vein, Costa (2010) claims thatgreater regulation is essential to solve crime3 The study of classical microeconomic theory, specifically the welfare theorems, leads to the same conclusion, as marketfailures violate the first theorem (see, among others, Mora-Sanguinetti and Salvador-Mora, 2016; Mora-Sanguinetti,2019a).2ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxof this article. In general, Laffont and Tirole (1993) argue that market failures would be a nec-essary but not sufficient condition for resorting to regulation since its effects are conditioned bytransactional, administrative-political or informational reasons (see also Mora-Sanguinetti andPérez-Valls, 2021). Specifically, as long as the regulation is not adequately designed or drafted,it could involve both direct and indirect economic costs. The former refers to resources devotedto the compliance of regulations. Indirect costs are associated with changes in agents’ behavior(firms, consumers or government). Both direct and indirect costs, may derive in a misallocation ofresources. In fact, the economic literature, and more specifically that which analyses the impactsof institutional quality (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012), makes several references to the costsderived from administrative burdens (red tape) (Hampton, 2005), which are the main motivationfor “better regulation” policies (Radaelli, 2007)4 .Several studies have also unveiled specific examples of some of the costs involved in regulation:Djankov et al. (2006) shows that improving business regulations, from the worst quartile to thebest, increases the annual growth rate by 2.3 percentage points. Coffey et al. (2020) identify sectorsaffected by regulations and conclude that U.S. economic growth has been dampened by 0.8% perannum due to federal regulations. Bailey and Thomas (2017) show that more intensively regulatedindustries experience lower enterprise birth rates and slower employment growth. Chambers et al.(2019b) conclude that, in the case of the U.S., a 10% increase in the effective federal regulatoryburden would increase the poverty rate by 2.5%. Furthermore, some specific areas of regulationhave been intensively analyzed in the literature. One of them is retail trade regulation, which canexert negative impacts on sectoral employment [Bertrand and Kramarz (2002) or Viviano (2008)].In addition to the potential economic costs, other relevant costs for the public administrationalso exist, such as judicial costs. The OECD (Palumbo et al., 2013) found that a low regulatoryquality, as measured by the World Bank’s regulatory quality indicators, was related to morelitigation in the countries analyzed. It should be noted that the increase in litigation has a relevantimpact on the functioning of the judicial system, implying longer trial durations. All this isimportant for the activity of lawyers and legal services professionals (Mora-Sanguinetti, 2019b)and has, indirectly, important economic impacts.1.1.  The  three  dimensions  of  regulatory  “complexity”One of the reasons why regulation may prove inefficient and therefore a source of concernfor “better regulation” initiatives, is due to its “complexity”. The concept of complexity refers toproblems regarding the “form” rather than the specific topics covered by regulation. A corpus ofregulations can in a first instance, be complex because it is too broad (the “quantity” approach), i.e.,there is an excessive volume of regulations or the latter proceed from a variety of different sources,making it difficult for economic agents to manage them and verify their validity (Bardhan 2002;Di Vita, 2018). Secondly, norms may be “qualitatively complex” because they are ambiguouslyor poorly drafted (the “linguistic” approach), complicating the understanding and compliance ofconsumers and businesses. Additionally, complexity can derive from how rules are connectedto each other (the “relational” approach). Norms drafted with more references to other normsdemand more resources to be understood and enforced. Fig. 1 refers to these three sources ofcomplexity.4 As Gai et al. (2019) emphasize some level of regulation complexity may be necessary.3ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxFig. 1. The three dimensions of regulatory complexity.Source: Own elaboration.The first approach to complexity, the volume of norms, has already been studied by somearticles in the literature, relying on indicators which measure the number of legal texts. Usingthis type of indicator, Di Vita (2018) shows that regulatory complexity hinders regional growthin Italy. Rios and Gianmoena (2020) find that government “quality”, seems to be one of themost robust drivers of resilience at the regional level. The quality of regulation is a fundamentalpart of such indicator of government quality. Consequently, the regulatory burden seems to be arelevant proxy for the distortions to which well-functioning economic structures are subjected.Kirchner (2012) demonstrates that at a national level (Australia), the growth in legislation, asmeasured by the number of pages is, in the short run, negatively related to growth in real incomeper capita. Mora-Sanguinetti and Pérez-Valls (2021) show that regulation is negatively relatedto the number of firms in Spain and may have effects on the size distribution of Spanish firms,contributing towards an excessive share of SMEs. This article continues the latter line of researchby accounting for words and sentences.The study of the last two approaches (complexity derived from linguistic or relational problems)has been scarce in the economic literature to date and, therefore, it has not been possible toconstruct comprehensive recommendations for economic policy based on these measures. Assuch, the research aimed at constructing measures of complexity in these new dimensions. For thistask, we use natural language processing (NLP) techniques in order to measure said dimensions.Moreover, these tools are seeing extensive application in the literature. They have been shown tobe useful in measuring economic uncertainty (see, Azqueta-Gavaldón et al., 2020; Ghirelli et al.,2019; Baker et al. 2016). Specifically, authors in the field of financial markets have applied them:Tobback et al. (2017) use NLP techniques to analyze the media’s perception of the tone of theECB’s monetary policy discourse; Ehrmann and Talmi (2020) focus on the semantic similarityof subsequent central bank statements in order to prove that volatility rises when changes occurafter sequences of similar statements; Hansen et al. (2017) use them to detect issues in FederalOpen Market Committee statement5 ; Hassan et al. (2019) analyze political risk using earningsconference calls, and Calomiris et al. (2020) derived a measure of firm-level regulatory costs fromcorporate earnings conference calls.5 There is an increasing interest in analyzing the drafting and language complexity of central bank statements. Hernández-Murillo and Shell (2014) and Coenen et al. (2017), show that statements have become more complex since the financialcrisis. Jansen (2011) shows that more complex statements are associated with higher volatility. Haldane and McMahon(2018) focus on the simplification of central bank communications.4ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxTo the best of our knowledge, RegData is the only database that measures regulations quan-titively using NLP techniques (see Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin, 2017). The authors compiledindustry-specific federal regulations for the US during the period 1997–2012 (see McLaughlinand Sherouse, 2019, for an update of the database). Davis (2017) uses it to relate regulatorycomplexity with policy uncertainty, whilst Chambers et al. (2019a) explore the link between reg-ulation and prices. In turn, Coffey et al. (2020) analyzes the relationship between regulation andeconomic growth and Bailey and Thomas (2017) study industry regulation and how it affectsenterprise birth and employment growth. Version 3.2 of the database was released in March 2020,covering the period 1970–2019 and includes, for the first time, measures relating to the complexityof regulatory texts applying a similar methodology to the one developed in this paper, in the formof the Shannon Entropy legibility indicator.Finally, our analysis is also related to Hurka and Haag (2019) which was the first article to uselinguistic and structural-relational complexity measures based on NLP. They show that the lengthof the decision-making process in the EU is influenced by different types of policy complexity.Our article develops and presents a new database (RECOS, REgulatory COmplexity in Spain)covering the laws enacted by the regional governments over the whole Spanish democratic period(from 1978 until 2019). As far as we know this is the first effort to build a database using NLPtechniques on regional regulations outside the USA. RECOS incorporates new legibility andrelational indicators as well as the traditional volume indicators. As explained in Sections 2 and4, some of these measures of legal complexity are new in the literature. With our new indicators(on regulation readability and interdependency) in hand, we explore the effects that regulatorycomplexity has on economic activity (productivity) and judicial efficacy (as representative of arelevant institutional dimension) using panel data analysis. All of this serves as the basis for theregulatory policy recommendations developed below.The study of the Spanish case at the regional level is of particular interest for several rea-sons: First, it allows us to develop comparative indicators (by region) of regulatory complexity(and analyze its economic impact) without having to compare different languages. This latterproblem presents a risk to other potential studies that wish to compare complexity in countrieswith different languages. Although some regions have their own regional language (in additionto Spanish), we have obtained the official Spanish version of norms. This mitigates comparisonproblems 
when using text analysis techniques. Second, Spanish regions also provide an adequateframework for comparison given that they all share the same basic institutional background: onthe one hand, the Spanish Constitution establishes a common framework of competences (withoutdenying specificities)6 . This implies that the set of topics and problems under regulation are morecomparable between Autonomous regions than between countries. On the other hand, the interna-tional norms affecting Spain, similarly affect all the regions. Third, with regards to the analysis ofeconomic impacts, specifically judicial data, the study of Spain is unique at an international levelbecause it maintains richer judicial databases than many other jurisdictions. Fourth, regardingthe construction of robustness checks, Spanish is a highly regulated language, with an officialdictionary (developed by the Real Academia Española - RAE), which facilitates the developmentof objective measures for infrequent words. Finally, beyond the studies mentioned, the case ofSpain, has not yet been widely analyzed even though it is one the largest economies of the Euroarea.6 See, for instance, articles 148 and 149 of the Spanish Constitution.5ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxWe will show that the effects of the different complexity measurements are robust to differ-ent specifications and seem to be independent between each other. These results suggest thatthe linguistic and relational complexity dimensions introduced in this document offer importantperspectives regarding regulatory complexity, which affect different aspects of economic per-formance. As such, they prove even more relevant than the traditional measures focused on thequantity of regulation. Public administration policies aimed at achieving “better regulation” musttake into account all these dimensions.The remainder of the article proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the database and the newindicators used in the analysis. Section 3 relates our indicators of regulatory complexity withmeasurements of productivity growth and judicial efficacy at the regional level using panel dataanalysis. Section 4 presents several robustness checks. Section 5 focuses on the main messages ofpolicy advice. The final section presents the main conclusions and future research avenues. Thearticle is completed by an appendix which includes further detailed information.2.  Measuring  regulatory  complexityTo support our analysis and policy advice, our research analyzes all the regional Laws andDecree-Laws published in the “Official State Bulletin” (Boletín  Oficial  del  Estado, BOE) overthe democratic period (from 1978 to 2019)7 . In order to do so, we performed web data extraction(web scrapping) from BOE.es. We thus collected a set of regional regulations with the force ofLaw8 summing up 8171 norms and 61 million words9 . We analyze each regulation within thecorpus using NLP techniques.2.1.  The  quantitative  approach:  volume  of  regulationsFig. 2 shows the total number of norms (second column), the total number of words (thirdcolumn) and the total number of sentences of said norms (fourth column) for each region. It alsographs the evolution of those measurements during the period of analysis. The markers (smallrhombuses) of each series in Fig. 2 highlight the minimum and the maximum level. Usually, themaximum takes place in the most recent years; there is a generalized upward trend in the volumeof regulations incorporated each year. We observe that some regions have adopted 3 times morenorms than others. For instance, Navarra (NAV) has adopted more than nine hundred regulationswhilst La Rioja (RIO) has less than three hundred. Andalusia (AND) norms contain almost 77 With the 1978 Constitution, Spain adopted a decentralized model of territorial and political organization. The regions(Autonomous Communities), have the power to adopt regulations with the force of law, and the Constitution allows themto have a very broad competence ceiling. In strict legal terms, the system is not called f̈ederalb̈ecause, among other reasons,access to autonomy is not compulsory, even though all the regions have it [see, among others, López Guerra (1994) orLópez Guerra et al. (2018)]. Overall, the system has largely converged with the c̈lassicalf̈ederal model and is, accordingto various international indicators, as decentralized as the federal ones (in the Regional Authority Index, RAI, Spain’sscore would be comparable to that of Canada or the USA and is higher than that of the UK; see Hooghe et al. 2008).8 Regulations with the force of law are part of the regulations adopted by the regional administrations, which canalso pass lower-level regulations. Taking Aranzadi as a general source [see Mora-Sanguinetti (2019a)], only in 2019 theregions adopted 7970 norms in total, proving to be the level of Spanish administration that adopts more rules (the centraladministration adopted 1785 and the local-provincial administration 578). Furthermore, in 2020 the pattern continued:regional administrations adopted 9645 regulations, compared to 1929 for the central administration and 676 for thelocal-provincial administrations.9 For an average person reading 8 hours per day, it would take more than a year just to read the corpus.6ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxFig. 2. Basic volume indicators of the regional legal corpus.Note: AND: Andalusia, ARA: Aragón, AST: Asturias, BAL: Balearic Islands; CAN: Canary Islands, CAT: Catalonia.CANT: Cantabria, EXT: Extremadura, GAL: Galicia, LEO: Castile and Leon, MAD: Community of Madrid, MAN:Castile- La Mancha, MUR: Murcia; NAV: Navarra, PV: Basque Country, RIO: La Rioja, VAL: Valencia. “Spain” is thesum of all the regional norms (thus not including the central administration norms).Source: Own elaboration.million words, compared to Asturias (AST) with only 1.8 million. For some regions, the averagenumber of words per sentence is 23 (Rioja), whilst in others such as Andalusia 52 words figureper sentence.The measurements of the number of norms, sentences, and words are part of the “quantityapproach” to complexity. However, these three indicators are independent: the length of the corpusis not necessarily related to the length of the norms within it. Indeed, the correlation between thenumber of norms and the number of words is 6% and with the number of sentences is 0%.10 In thispaper we will work with the measurement of the number of norms as this is the usual approachto the volume of regulation used in the literature.2.2.  The  relational  approach:  network  analysisAn additional element that contributes to the complexity of regulation is the external interde-pendence between norms. Citations and references to other norms increase the cost of knowledgeacquisition. That is, a legal text that obliges the reader to consult other legal texts to reach acomplete understanding of its content will demand an increased effort in terms of usage and10 The correlation between words and sentences amounts to 90%. The correlation between words and paragraphs amountsto 79%. The correlation between sentences and paragraphs amounts to 87%.7ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxFig. 3. Regional network of norms (only for norms with more than 50 inward-outward links).Note: AND: Andalusia, ARA: Aragón, AST: Asturias, BAL: Balearic Islands; CAN: Canary Islands, CAT: Catalonia.CANT: Cantabria, EXT: Extremadura, GAL: Galicia, LEO: Castile and Leon, MAD: Community of Madrid, MAN:Castile- La Mancha, MUR: Murcia; NAV: Navarra, PV: Basque Country, RIO: La Rioja, VAL: Valencia.Source: Own elaboration.enforcement. We have built an indicator which computes the average number of norms that arereferenced in the norms adopted per each region in a specific year.Fig. 3 graphs the links between norms per each region during the period analyzed. Eachnetwork corresponds to a region. For the sake of simplicity, it only includes those texts withmore than 50 links. Fig. 3 illustrates that there are important differences between the networksof different regions. Some regions, like Aragon (ARA) and Valencia (VAL), have much moreintricate structures. In contrast, Asturias (AST) or Navarra (NAV) do not have any norms withmore than 50 links. We also have regions such as Extremadura (EXT), Castile- La Mancha (MAN)or La Rioja (RIO) with low connectivity within their legal corpus. A more interconnected graphpoints to a more complex structure of the legal corpus.8ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxThe network representation as graphed in Fig. 3 provides a static proxy of the stock of regula-tions and their relational structure. In order to construct panel data estimations, we need to exploreits time variance as well, i.e., the evolution of these network structures over time. Therefore, wealso compute the average number of new links generated by the regulation adopted during eachyear according to Eq. (1).#Linksreg,t =∑n ε (reg,t)Linksn∑n ε (reg,t)n(1)where #Linksreg,t corresponds to the average number of links that incorporates the norms adoptedby a region in the year, t. The numerator is the sum of the links incorporated in the norms, n,adopted during a year. Denominator is the number of norms adopted by the region, reg, in year, t.The last column of Fig. 4 presents our relational indicator. We observe that for all the regionsthe maximum number of links always occurs in more recent years than the minimum. This reflectsthe fact that the average number of external links of legal text has increased over the democraticperiod.On average, new laws incorporate references to 11 different legal text. Some regions like Aragon(ARA) incorporate more external references, about 18, while other regions such as Navarra (NAV)only incorporate 3 references. In Fig. 3 we observe that Navarra does not possess regulations withmore than 50 references, compared to Aragon which maintains a very interconnected structure.The proposed indicator can capture some network characteristics observable in the graphs (size,density and connectivity) as well as their evolution over the period of analysis.2.3.  The  linguistic  approach  to  complexity:  indicators  of  legibilityThe linguistic approach to complexity analyzes the lexical structure of the texts (paragraphs,sentences and words). Regulations may be “complex” because they are ambiguously or poorlydrafted, causing difficulties to consumers and businesses in terms of understanding and compli-ance. The data presented in the middle column of Fig. 4 follows the   indicator proposed byMuñoz and Muñoz (2006). This indicator has been used recently in other works analyzing theSpanish language [Brelsford et al. (2018) and Campillo et al. (2020)].11 It is computed followingEq. (2).μn =(WonWon −  1) (Lenσ2Len)×  100 (2)where, n, refers to norms; Wo, corresponds to the number of words; Le, is the average number ofletters per word and, σ2Le, refers to the variance in the number of letters per word12 . In practice, μusually takes values between 0 and 100, although it can reach higher values. Greater values of the11 Alternatives to our indicator are those derived from the work of Flesch (1948). Fernández (1959) and the Flesch-Szigriszt indicator (1993) adapted the indicator to the Spanish language but used an ad-hoc parameterization which is notwithout criticism.12 For texts with a volume of words similar to those considered in this document, the first parenthesis tends to one andtherefore the formula is the inverse of Pearson’s coefficient of variation which indicates the relationship between thestandard deviation of a sample and its mean, all divided by the standard variation.9ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxFig. 4. Basic regulatory complexity indicators at the regional level.Note: AND: Andalusia, ARA: Aragón, AST: Asturias, BAL: Balearic Islands; CAN: Canary Islands, CAT: Catalonia.CANT: Cantabria, EXT: Extremadura, GAL: Galicia, LEO: Castile and Leon, MAD: Community of Madrid, MAN:Castile- La Mancha, MUR: Murcia; NAV: Navarra, PV: Basque Country, RIO: La Rioja, VAL: Valencia. “Spain” is thesum of all the regional norms (thus not including the central administration norms).Source: Own elaboration.μ  indicator are associated with better readability. Lower values correspond with more complexregulations, lower legibility.The final value of the legibility indicator is the mean value of the legibility indicator of thenorms approved in the region during the year, Legibreg,t =  μn ∈ (reg, t).For most regions, we observe a downward trend in legibility, Fig. 4. The small graphs alsoshow the minimum and maximum values of the series. The ease with which a reader can decodenorms seems to be lower during the latter period of the series. Please note that the maximum levelof legibility usually is located at the beginning of the graph.The usual values for the legibility indicator variables are between 40 and 44, correspondingto difficult texts (the mean is 41,7, the median is 41,6 and the standard deviation is 1,4). All thedata but two are within the range 38–48 which, in accordance with Muñoz and Muñoz (2006)correspond to difficult texts (very difficult texts are below 31 and easy texts have an μ  indicatorvalue over 70). Navarra (NAV) has legal norms that are more legible than Andalusia (AND),10ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxExtremadura (EXT) or Valencia (VAL). The variable considered for estimation is the averagevalue of the legibility indicator for the norms adopted during each year.Lower legibility and higher interconnected laws result in more complex regulations. Theireffects are complementary but independent to the measurement of the quantity of regulation,as will be shown in the next sections. The correlation matrix between variables shows that thecorrelations between the number of links and the number of norms and legibility is only −2%,and −10%, respectively. The number of links and legibility correlates at a level of −33%.3.  Examples  of  the  impact  of  regulatory  complexity  on  economic  efficiencyFrom a theoretical point of view, more complex regulations are less effective in reducingtransaction costs. In the worst case, complexity may entail costs for businesses and citizens andmay lead to resource misallocation. In this section, we make use of the variables developedin Section 2 to preliminarily explore correlation with economic and judicial variables. Morespecifically, we empirically analyze the relationship between regulatory complexity in Spain,focusing on the new indicators (linguistic and relational complexity) and two sets of structuralvariables at the regional level: (labor) productivity and judicial efficacy. It is part of the futureresearch agenda to analyze in depth each of the different channels of these relationships.3.1.  Comprehensive  macroeconomic  impacts:  labor  productivityWe present the relation of regulatory complexity with a comprehensive macroeconomic mea-sure: labor productivity, defined as value added (VA) per hour. We prefer this measure (VA perhour) to a more general one such as the GDP per capita for two reasons: it is more robust tounderlying regional demographic and labor market trends (for instance, unemployment or theparticipation rate) and it is closer to structural economic growth (Harvie et al., 2009). The sourceof regional macroeconomic data is De la Fuente (2019). Regional information on real VA per houris available for the period 1977−2017. Those regions with more complex regulations are expectedto experiment lower productivity. Within each region, periods with more complex regulations areexpected to be negatively related to productivity.This exploration is based upon the fact that regulatory complexity is supposed to be relatedto the structural component of productivity. More 
specifically, the complexity of regulation has anegative impact on productivity through “total factor productivity” (TFP). TFP growth captures theeffects of several mixed factors, including the impact of the quality of the institutional environment,such as the regulation of product and labor markets and the capacity of the economy to innovate onthe productive use of labor, capital and other inputs. TFP growth is often defined as “technologicalprogress” [see Scarpetta et al. (2002), Mora-Sanguinetti and Fuentes (2012) and Mora-Sanguinetti(2021)].We estimate Eq. (3) using panel data covering the 17 Spanish regions. Our dependent variableis productivity. As already mentioned, our measures of complexity are: first, the number of normsas a proxy of the volume of regional regulation (we expect a negative relationship); second,average   legibility as a proxy of linguistic complexity (we expect a positive relationship); andthird, our relational variable, measured with the average number of links present in the new norms(we expect a negative relationship). Our estimates include regional and time fixed effects, allvariables entering the estimation in logs. As in the rest of estimates, errors have been clustered atthe regional level.11ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxTable 1Labor productivity per hour. Panel data Fixed effects.(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)# Norms t 0.00232 0.00181(0.00158) (0.00150)Legibility t 0.0769*** 0.0642** 0.0649**(0.0261) (0.0226) (0.0225)# Links t −0.00348* −0.00257 −0.00221(0.00196) (0.00186) (0.00221)Constant 0.551*** 0.259 0.544*** 0.309 0.315(0.146) (0.196) (0.140) (0.177) (0.183)Labor productivity t-1 0.947*** 0.948*** 0.949*** 0.948*** 0.947***(0.0148) (0.0144) (0.0144) (0.0146) (0.0152)Fixed effectsTime Yes Yes Yes Yes YesRegional Yes Yes Yes Yes YesObservations 583 583 583 583 583R-squared 0.985 0.985 0.985 0.985 0.985Source: Own elaboration.Robust (clustered) standard errors in brackets. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.Estimates are presented in Table 1. Columns (1) to (3) present the results when the complexityvariables are included independently. The estimates take the form of a traditional convergenceregression, which controls for the initial productivity value. All measurements of complexity havethe expected sign. The new complexity indicators have a (statistically) significant effect. Column(4) includes both the lexical complexity and the relational complexity dimensions. Both maintaintheir sign, but the relational complexity dimension loses its statistically significant level whenthe quantity indicator is also incorporated. Column (5) includes all the complexity indicatorssimultaneously; the estimated parameters maintain the sign, magnitude and significance levels.Table 1 is in line with the findings of Di Vita (2018) which approximates the complexityof regulation through the quantity approach (number or volume of norms) and shows that anincrease in the number of norms correlates with lower productivity. Our results also show thatother dimensions of regulation affect productivity, this being consistent with Coffey et al. (2020)and Djankov et al. (2006). First, legibility is positively related to productivity. Finally, the analysisof our “relational” variable also shows that a greater number of links to other norms in the newregulations correlates negatively with productivity. These results13 are new in the literature andconfirm that when analyzing regulatory complexity, it is useful to examine further factors inaddition to the volume of regulations. Interestingly though, these other factors do not seem to be13 The effects presented in Table 1 are contemporary. However, there are numerous judicial rulings (from the Consti-tutional Court) in Spain that suggest that regulation is predictable (and therefore could have anticipated the effects oneconomic efficiency). Thus, Mora-Sanguinetti and Pérez-Valls (2021) analyzed the advanced effects of the quantitativecomplexity of regulation (in addition to the contemporary ones) on business demographics. It is debatable whether agentscan foresee linguistic or relational complexity beyond quantitative complexity.12ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxrelated with the volume of regulation (number of norms) which has been traditionally used as aproxy for complexity.3.2.  Effects  of  complexity  on  legal  costs  (litigation  and  judicial  efficacy)Regulatory complexity may also imply other relevant costs for public management (in additionto having an impact on private agents) such as judicial costs. That is, those related to the effec-tiveness of the judicial system and the enforcement mechanisms available in the economy. Asnoted in the introduction, the OECD (Palumbo et al., 2013), found that a low quality of regulationwas related to more litigation in the countries analyzed. An increase in litigation is also related tolower judicial efficacy. In other words, the judicial system would show higher rates of congestionor longer trial durations. Judicial inefficacy has important implications for economic efficiency inSpain, reducing credit (Mora-Sanguinetti et al., 2017), investment at the enterprise level (Dejuán& Mora-Sanguinetti, 2021) or the proportion of rented housing (Mora-Sanguinetti, 2012).Our dependent variables in this case will be a measure of trial duration in the civil jurisdictionfollowing the CEPEJ (2016) approach, Eq. (4). Trial duration is a measure that approximates thecongestion of the judicial system. In other words, its ineffectiveness in swiftly resolving casesbrought before the courts. The raw data for its calculation comes from the General Council of theJudiciary.Trial  durationreg,t (CEPEJ) =Pending  casesreg,tCases  resolvedreg,t*365 (4)We analyze this effect by means of Eq. (5). As before, we estimated the equation with panel datacovering the 17 Spanish regions. All variables enter the estimation in logs. Following the empiricalstrategy explained above, we introduce each variable of regulatory complexity independently. Allestimates include fixed effects at the regional level and time dummies. As control variables weinclude productivity and the number of lawyers [see Mora-Sanguinetti and Garoupa (2015) andCarmignani and Giacomelli (2010)]. Errors have been clustered at the regional level.Jud.  Congreg,t =  Cte  +  β1 Complexityreg,t−1+K∑k=1δkControlkreg,t−1 +  Jud.  Congreg,t−1 +  εreg,t (5)Table 2 shows the results. As indicated previously, the analysis is carried out for civiljurisdiction, which disciplines cases involving private contracts (between citizens and betweencompanies). Specifically, we build the measurements of trial duration until execution. As a robust-ness check, in a set of estimates (columns 1–3), we exclude family law conflicts and in columns4–6 we include the whole set of civil cases. The signs are as expected, and the impacts aresignificant for the relational complexity variables (number of links).The results suggest that greater relational complexity (that is, the need to consult or understanda greater number of interconnected norms in order to make use of the law), makes the functioningof the courts (which basically have to apply the body of regulation to resolve a specific conflict)more difficult or slower. The work of the courts does not seem to be affected either by the numberof rules per  se  or by the linguistic complexity of those rules, possibly suggesting that legalprofessionals are trained precisely to master these two dimensions.13ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxTable 2Judicial congestion (trial duration). Panel data Fixed effects.(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)Civil (without family) Total civil# Norms t-1 −0.00619 −0.00833(0.0161) (0.0146)Legibility t-1 −0.126 −0.0696(0.246) (0.229)# Links t.1 0.0232* 0.0212**(0.0110) (0.00996)Judicial Cong. t-1 0.690*** 0.689*** 0.684*** 0.699*** 0.699*** 0.694***(0.0556) (0.0550) (0.0563) (0.0564) (0.0557) (0.0569)Constant 6.820 7.327 7.076 7.003 7.282 7.246(6.490) (6.536) (6.344) (6.007) (6.115) (5.877)Fixed effectsTime Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes YesRegional Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes YesControls (lawyers, productivity) Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes YesObservations 272 272 255 255 255 255R-squared 0.807 0.807 0.810 0.783 0.783 0.786Source: Own elaboration.Robust (clustered) standard errors in brackets. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.4.  Robustness  checksWe perform two alternative robustness checks: first we consider two new measures of linguisticcomplexity: entropy and the percentage of infrequent distinct words (type) in the adopted norms;secondly, we modified the original database to only include rules with a minimum number ofwords, thus eliminating very short rules.4.1.  Additional  measures  of  linguistic  complexityIn this section we introduce two additional measures of linguistic complexity: entropy and theshare of infrequent words. These variables replace the μ  linguistic complexity index.4.1.1. EntropyAn additional measure of linguistic complexity is the “entropy” indicator proposed by Katzand Bommarito (2014) and Shannon (1951).14 To build the entropy indicator we sum up theprobability of occurrence of each distinct word, pw, within the set of total words, Wn, of a norm,n, multiplied by their logarithm in base 2 of this probability (see Eq. 6). Entropy characterizesthe uncertainty or variance in a system15, in this case the normative system. A minimum level of14 Another work following this line of research (i.e., quantitative analysis of the law) is Friedrich et al. (2020), whocomputed entropy indicators based on the written text of opinions published by the U.S. Supreme Court and the GermanBundesgerichtshof. As indicated, one advantage of our analysis is that we are not forced to compare different languagessince all our sources are officially in Spanish.15 For texts with a number of words such as those considered in this document, the first parenthesis tends to one and,therefore, the formula is the inverse of Pearson’s coefficient of variation, which indicates the relationship between thestandard deviation of a sample and its mean, all divided by the standard variation.14ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxentropy is necessary in order for information to exist within a text. However, a higher degree ofentropy is characteristic of more complex legal texts which include a larger variety of concepts.Entropy n =  −∑w ∈ Wnpw log2(pw) (6)The final value for the entropy indicator, specific for each region and year, is the simple meanof the entropy indicator for each norm adopted in the region during the year, Entropyreg,t =Entropyn ∈ (reg, t).4.1.2.  Share  of  infrequent  wordsWe also construct a new index of similarity between the vocabulary used in legal texts and thatmost frequently used in the Spanish language according to the Royal Academy of the SpanishLanguage (RAE)16 . We obtain the percentage of words used in the legal texts which do notappear among the 10.000 more frequently used words in the Spanish language17 . In Eq. (7), thenumerator counts the different words in a norm, Wdn, that do not appear among the 10.000 mostfrequent words in Spanish, according to the RAE. The denominator counts the total number ofdifferent words in that text. On average, between 55% and 60% of the words in the regional legalcorpus do not belong to the list of the 10.000 most frequently used words. The greater the shareof infrequent words the lower the legibility. Hence, this is an inversed index of the simplicity ofthe vocabulary used in the regulatory framework.Freqn =  100×∑Wdn /i  n RAEWdn∑Wdn(7)The entropy indicator is negatively correlated with the legibility indicator μ  discussed above(-0.65). The share of infrequent  words in the Spanish language has a low negative correlation withthe entropy indicator (-0.47) and a positive correlation with legibility (0.82).We again analyzed the impacts of regulatory complexity on productivity and legal costs usingthese new approaches to complexity. Table 3 presents the estimations: Columns 1 and 2 analyzecorrelation with productivity. Columns 3 and 4 discuss the implications for legal costs. As carriedout so far, the different dimensions of complexity are incorporated independently. In the case ofproductivity growth, the entropy indicator is significant and with the expected negative sign. Inthe case of judicial congestion (trial duration), the share of infrequent words is significant withthe expected positive value.4.2.  Different  data  setsFinally, as an additional robustness check, we have worked with a modified database: we haveonly taken into account the norms of a certain length (excluding therefore the shorter ones). Inthe first place, we included only the regulations with more than 200 words and, secondly, theregulations with more than 1000 words.16 Information obtained from Current Spanish Reference Corpus, CREA, Real Academia Española - RAE.es17 We also used the percentage of (unique) frequent words over the total number of distinct words used in the text. Resultsdo not vary. Results are available on request.15ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxTable 3Robustness alternative indicators of legibility. Panel data Fixed effects.(1) (2) (3) (4)Dep var: Productivity Dep var: judicial congestion (civil, without family)Entropy t −0.0508* Entropy t-1 0.405*(0.0263) (0.198)Share unique t −0.0319 Share unique t-1 0.292**(0.0245) (0.125)Productivity t-1 0.949*** 0.949*** Jud Cong t-1 0.688*** 0.683***(0.0149) (0.0147) (0.0565) (0.0566)Constant 0.871*** 0.663*** Constant 4.185 6.138(0.214) (0.138) (6.445) (6.490)Fixed effects Fixed effectsTime Yes Yes Time Yes YesRegional Yes Yes Regional Yes YesLawyers + Prod t-1 Yes YesObservations 583 583 Observations 255 255R-squared 0.985 0.985 R-squared 0.810 0.810Source: own elaboration.Robust (clustered) standard errors in brackets. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.Table 4Robustness Dep. var.: Growth VA per hour.Productivitygrowth(1)Norms > 200 wordsProductivitygrowth(2)Norms > 1000 wordsJudicial cong.(3)Norms > 200 wordsJudicial cong.(4)Norms > 1000 words# Norms 0.00226 0.00139 −0.00811 0.00432(0.00159) (0.00157) (0.0165) (0.0196)Legibility 0.0795** 0.0710*** −0.176 0.0692(0.0313) (0.0210) (0.255) (0.469)# Links −0.00348* −0.00336 0.0232* 0.0254**(0.00196) (0.00199) (0.0110) (0.0110)Fixed effectsTime Yes Yes Yes YesRegional Yes Yes Yes YesObservations 583 583 255 255Source: Authors’ calculations.Robust (clustered) standard errors in brackets. ***p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1.The reason for making these changes is that some regulations with low economic or legalcontent have the force of law, such as those that just modify a ministerial or departmental structure.Those norms are usually short. When we select longer regulations, we are removing 197 and2029 norms respectively form the original data set. Table 4 presents the results in terms of therelationship between complexity and productivity (or legal costs) using Eq. (3) for productivitygrowth (see columns 1 and 2). Columns 3 and 4 present the estimated parameters for judicialcongestion (trial duration) following Eq. (5).Our variables of regulatory complexity always have the expected sign. Legibility seems to havea significant and positive correlation with productivity, while the relational complexity measure16ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxseems to have a positive relationship with legal costs (judicial congestion). Overall, these resultsshow that it may be necessary to select only the regulations with the greatest economic and legalcontent in order to truly understand the impacts of complexity on productivity and legal costs.5.  Messages  for  policy  modelingOur analyzes have several policy implications. First, any society needs to build a shared under-standing of the importance and meaning of “better regulation”. Specifically, 
regulators and policymakers need to be aware that the way in which they regulate may have economic and socialcosts. In this sense, in order to improve the process of adoption of new regulations, it is nec-essary to improve consultations and pre-legislative scrutiny and enhance public awareness andparticipation.Second, simultaneously, it is necessary to develop a comprehensive policy which can beexpressed as “drafting instructions” and ensure that it is implemented. This have implicationsin the regulation design stage (checking if new legislation is necessary, desirable or acceptable foradoption), rewriting existing legislation (revising the norms to eliminate redundant, contradictory,unclear regulations as this would serve to enhance the quality of the regulatory framework) and,finally, ensuring that legislation is accessible to society.From our analysis of the three dimensions of regulatory complexity and their consequences,several recommendations for drafting and rewriting regulations (and thus for achieving “betterregulation”) can be drawn: first, regulators should use plain language and write clear, concise, well-organized norms with a reader-centered organization; second, regulators should avoid ambiguousor contradictory provisions and use “user friendly” language and writing style; third, regulatorsshould reduce the unnecessary links to other norms.All of this would be facilitated by the development of checklists, templates and writing guide-lines. It seems relevant to recall that the most recent norms, such as the above-mentioned RoyalDecree 931/2017, in the case of Spain, provide for the creation of a “Methodological Guide for thepreparation of the regulatory impact analysis report”. In the specific case of Spain, the “RegulatoryImpact Analysis Reports” (designed under the Royal Decree 931/2017 and the MethodologicalGuide) should be expanded with a series of metrics based on the analysis of the text of the reg-ulation to be adopted, as suggested in this research. Specifically, it is worth thinking of a set of“structural metrics”, containing information on the length of the text (and the number of words) ofthe norm and a reference to the weight of the new norm within the regulatory framework - basedon the number of norms it repeals or does not repeal [Article 1. b) of Royal Decree 931/2017]-.This second calculation would require tracking the amount of regulation by subject area (see alsoMora-Sanguinetti, 2019a). Furthermore, there must be a clear accounting and an analysis of thenumber of links to other norms.More generally, the use and understanding of the regulation would be facilitated by improvingits accessibility. In particular, the following considerations may be made: first, law is data whichcould be made available to society. For instance, if it is possible, writing summaries and com-pendia of existing legislation and generating non-legal binding documents explaining the law fordissemination among the general public. Second, law is composed mainly by words but, in somecases, its message could be better transmitted with new elements of communication like figures,diagrams, charts, graphs, etc. exploiting the new approaches offered by information technologies.Third, public repositories of legal texts should maintain consolidated norms in one single text aswell as provide links to other connected regulations.17ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxThese measures, aimed to reduce regulatory complexity, should also lead to an improvement inthe functioning of the judicial system; the regulations would be more easily reached and enforced.6.  Concluding  remarksRegulation, as part of the institutional framework, matters for economic efficiency. While theobjective of regulation is to reduce transaction costs and mitigate other market failures, its effectsmay be less beneficial or even counterproductive if the legal corpus is poorly designed. One of thereasons that can make regulation inefficient is its “complexity”. The potential negative impacts ofregulation have prompted numerous government initiatives aimed at achieving “better regulation”.“Complexity” has been measured by some recent works in terms of “volumes” or quantitiesof regulations (for instance, the number of norms or pages). In this article we argue that com-plexity has additional dimensions such as legibility, that is, the ease of reading the norms, andthe relational structure of the norm, being the average number of external regulations to which acertain legislative text refers. Natural language processing (NLP) techniques allow us to developobjective indicators on those dimensions and to analyze their effects.The first contribution to the literature of this article is the construction of a new database(RECOS, REgulatory COmplexity in Spain) which includes information on the laws (and othernorms with the force of Law) adopted by the Autonomous Regions since the beginning of thedemocratic period in Spain. We also build a set of indicators covering the new dimensions ofcomplexity: legibility and network structure. The second contribution of this research is a noveland initial exploration of the correlation of the new dimensions of complexity on various structuralvariables; namely, labor productivity growth and judicial efficacy.The results of our estimations show that the new dimensions of regulatory complexity arenegatively related to productivity and judicial efficacy. That is, judicial efficacy and labor produc-tivity growth seem to decrease when the norms are less legible and when the legal texts are moredifficult to use because they require access to a greater number of regulations (due to their networkstructure). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study showing the potential impacts ofthese new dimensions of regulatory “complexity” on different measures of economic efficiency.Our research thus rationalizes the efforts of public administrations to achieve “better reg-ulation”. Indeed, some countries provide guidelines (or even create public bodies) that try toimprove the quality of norms. For instance, the Government of Spain has initiatives in place toimprove regulatory quality and to assess the need for new regulation (see Royal Decree 931/2017and Mora-Sanguinetti, 2019a). Specifically, the quality of regional regulation should never beneglected. At present, nearly 70% of all Spanish regulations are issued at a regional level (seeMora-Sanguinetti and Pérez-Valls, 2021). As already highlighted, based on a regional analysisof the different dimensions of complexity, our research reveals substantial differences in regula-tory complexity between the Spanish regions. This provides the opportunity to identify areas forimprovement in the quality of regulation.In terms of economic analysis, this article leaves open the normative question of what theoptimal level of regulatory complexity is, taking into account the optimal level of economicgrowth. Futures avenues of research should also distinguish between pure economic legislation(labor markets, trade and retail, sectors regulation, etc.) and legislation on topics which primafacie may have only indirect effects on economic performance (prisons, health, etc.). Addressingthe analysis of regulation by theme will also allow to clarify, among other things, if the increase inthe regulatory power (increase in competences) of the regions drives the increase in the number ofregulations. In this first analysis we decided to follow a more general approach covering all norms,18ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxthis strategy precludes the selection bias criticism. Our paper opens the road towards using NLPmethodology for the purpose of constructing additional measures of complexity such us in-depthsentence structure (conditional, subordinate, etc.), vocabulary accuracy (use of vague terms) oranalysis of the internal structure of regulation.ReferencesAcemoglu, D., & Robinson, J. A. (2012). Why nations fail: The origins of power, prosperity, and poverty. Crown Books.Al-Ubaydli, O., & McLaughlin, P. A. (2017). Regdata: A numerical database on industry-specific regulations for allUnited States industries and federal regulations, 1997–2012. Regulation and Governance, 11(1), 109–123.Azqueta-Gavaldón, A., Hirschbühl, D., Onorante, L., & Saiz, L. (2020). Economic policy uncertainty in the Euro Area:An unsupervised machine learning approach ECB Working Papers, 2359.Bailey, J. B., & Thomas, D. W. (2017). Regulating away competition: The effect of regulation on entrepreneurship andemployment. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 52(3), 237–254.Baker, S. R., Bloom, N., & Davis, S. J. (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 131(4), 1593–1636.Bardhan, P. (2002). Decentralization of governance and development. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16(4), 185–205.Bertrand, M., & Kramarz, F. (2002). Does entry regulation hinder job creation? Evidence from the French retail industry.The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1369–1413.Brelsford, K. M., Ruiz, E., & Beskow, L. (2018). Developing informed consent materials for non-English-speakingparticipants: An analysis of four professional firm translations from English to Spanish. Clinical Trials, 15(6), 557–566.Calomiris, C. W., Mamaysky, H., & Yang, R. (2020). Measuring the cost of regulation: A text-based approach NBER-Working Papers, 26856.Campillo, J., Morato, A., Maqueda, I., & Sánchez-Cuadrado, S. (2020). Readability of Spanish e-governmentinformation. In 15th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI) (pp. 1–4).https://doi.org/10.23919/CISTI49556.2020.9141000Carmignani, A., & Giacomelli, S. (2010). Too many lawyers? Litigation in Italian civil courts, Temi di discussione. pp.745. Banca d’Italia.CEPEJ [European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice]. (2016). European judicial systems efficiency and quality ofjustice CEPEJ Studies, No. 23. http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/evaluation/default en.aspChambers, D., Collins, C. A., & Krause, A. (2019). How do federal regulations affect consumer prices? An analysis ofthe regressive effects of regulation. Public Choice, 180(1–2), 57–90.Chambers, D., McLaughlin, P. A., & Stanley, L. (2019). Regulation and poverty: An empirical examination of therelationship between the incidence of federal regulation and the occurrence of poverty across the US states. PublicChoice, 180(1–2), 131–144.Coenen, G., Ehrmann, M., Gaballo, G., Hoffmann, P., Nakov, A., Nardelli, S., Persson, E., & Strasser, G. (2017).Communication of monetary policy in unconventional times ECB Working Papers, 2080, June.Coffey, B., McLaughlin, P. A., & Peretto, P. (2020). The cumulative cost of regulations. Review of Economic Dynamics,38, 1–21.Costa, A. M. (2010). The economics of crime: A discipline to be invented and a nobel prize to be awarded. Journal ofPolicy Modeling, 32(5), 648–661.Davis, S. J. (2017). Regulatory complexity and policy uncertainty: Headwinds of our own making. Becker FriedmanInstitute for Research in Economics Working Papers. No. 2723980.De la Fuente, A. (2019). Series largas de algunos agregados económicos y demográficos regionales. In Estudios sobre laeconomía española (2019/19). Fedea.Dejuán, D., & Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S. (2021). Which legal procedure affects business investment most, and whichcompanies are most sensitive? Evidence from microdata. Economic Modelling, 94, 201–220.Di Vita, G. (2018). Institutional quality and the growth rates of the Italian regions: The costs of regulatory complexity.Papers in Regional Science, 97(4), 1057–1081.Djankov, S., McLiesh, C., & Ramalho, R. M. (2006). Regulation and growth. Economics Letters, 92(3), 395–401.Ehrmann, M., & Talmi, J. (2020). Starting from a blank page? Semantic similarity in central bank communication andmarket volatility. Journal of Monetary Economics, 111, 48–62.Fernández, J. (1959). Medidas sencillas de lecturabilidad. Consigna, 214, 29–32.Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32, 221–233.19ARTICLE IN PRESS+ModelJPO-6708; No. of Pages 21J. de Lucio and J.S Mora-Sanguinetti Journal of Policy Modeling xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxxFriedrich, R., Luzzatto, M., & Ash, E. (2020). Entropy in legal language. In Proceedings of the 2020 Natural LegalLanguage Processing (NLLP) Workshop , 6 pp.Gai, P., Kemp, M. H., Sánchez Serrano, A., & Schnabel, I. (2019). Regulatory complexity and the quest for robust regulation(No. 8). In Reports of the Advisory Scientific Committee. European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), European Systemof Financial Supervision.Ghirelli, C., Gil, M., Pérez, J. J., & Urtasun, A. (2019). Measuring economic and economic policy uncertainty and theirmacroeconomic effects: The case of Spain. Empirical Economics, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181-019-01772-8Haldane, A., & McMahon, M. (2018). Central bank communications and the general public. AEA Papers and Proceedings,108, 578–583.Hampton, P. (2005). Reducing administrative burdens. London [Hampton Report].Hansen, S., McMahon, M., & Prat, A. (2017). Transparency and deliberation within the FOMC: A computational linguisticsapproach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 801–870.Harvie, D., Slater, G., Philp, B., & Wheatley, D. (2009). Economic well-being and British regions: The problem withGDP per capita. Review of Social Economy, 67(4), 483–505.Hassan, T., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., & Tahoun, A. (2019). Firm level political risk: Measurement and effects. TheQuarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4), 2135–2202.Hernández-Murillo, R., & Shell, H. (2014). Rising complexity of the FOMC statement. Economic Synopses, 23(2). Avail-able at. https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/economic-synopses/2014/11/05/the-rising-complexity-of-the-fomc-statement/Hooghe, L., Schakel, A. H., & Marks, G. (2008). Appendix B: Country and regional scores. Regional & Federal Studies,18(2), 259–274.Hurka, S., & Haag, M. (2019). Policy complexity and legislative duration in the European Union. European Union Politics,21(1), 87–108.Jansen, D. J. (2011). Does the clarity of central bank communication affect volatility in financial markets? Evidence fromHumphrey–Hawkins testimonies. Contemporary Economic Policy, 29(4), 494–509.Katz, D. M., & Bommarito, M. J. (2014). Measuring the complexity of the law: The United States code. ArtificialIntelligence and Law, 22(4), 337–374.Kirchner, S. (2012). Federal legislative activism in Australia: A new approach to testing Wagner’s law. Public Choice,153(3-4), 375–392.Laffont, J.-J., & Tirole, J. (1993). A theory of incentives in procurement and regulation. Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA:The MIT Press.López Guerra, L. (1994). Introducción al Derecho Constitucional. Valencia: Tirant Lo Blanch.López Guerra, L., Espín, E., García Morillo, J., Pérez Tremps, P., & Satrústegui, M. (2018). Derecho ConstitucionalVolumen II (11th edition). Valencia: Tirant Lo Blanch.McLaughlin, P. A., & Sherouse, O. (2019). RegData 2.2: A panel dataset on US federal regulations. Public Choice,180(1-2), 43–55.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S. (2012). Is judicial inefficacy increasing the weight of the house property market in Spain? Evidenceat the local level. SERIEs. Journal of the Spanish Economic Association, 3(3), 339–365.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S. (2021). Justicia y economía: la eficiencia del sistema judicial en España y sus impactos económicos.Papeles de Economía Española,. N.o 168.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S. (2019a). La ‘complejidad’ de la regulación española ¿Cómo medirla? ¿Qué impacto económicotiene? Revista ICE, 907, 147–162.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S. (2019b). Producción normativa, mercado de la abogacía y litigación en España. Dossier, Diciem-bre/2019: Thomson Reuters.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S., & Fuentes, A. (2012). An analysis of productivity performance in Spain before and during thecrisis: Exploring the role of institutions OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 973.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S., & Garoupa, N. (2015). Do lawyers induce litigation? Evidence from Spain, 2001-2010. Interna-tional Review of Law and Economics, 44, 29–41.Mora-Sanguinetti, J. S., & Pérez-Valls, R. (2021). How 
d