Global food trade, economic complexity, and their impact on a country's water resources

16 July 2022POLITECNICO DI TORINORepository ISTITUZIONALEGlobal food trade, economic complexity, and their impact on a country's water resources / Sciarra, Carla; Chiarotti,Guido; Ridolfi, Luca; Laio, Francesco. - In: GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH ABSTRACTS. - ISSN 1607-7962. - (2019).OriginalGlobal food trade, economic complexity, and their impact on a country's water resourcesPublisher:PublishedDOI:Terms of use:openAccessPublisher copyright(Article begins on next page)This article is made available under terms and conditions as specified in the  corresponding bibliographic description inthe repositoryAvailability:This version is available at: 11583/2930971 since: 2021-10-14T11:51:52ZCopernicus PublicationsGeophysical Research AbstractsVol. 21, EGU2019-13180, 2019EGU General Assembly 2019© Author(s) 2019. CC Attribution 4.0 license.Global food trade, economic complexity, and their impact on a country’swater resourcesCarla Sciarra, Guido Chiarotti, Francesco Laio, and Luca RidolfiDepartment of Environment, Land and Infrastructure Engineering, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 10129Torino, Italy (carla.sciarra@polito.it)The dynamics of economic growth of countries have profound implications for the world’s social and environ-mental status. The economic strength of a country is standardly measured through its Gross Domestic Product(GDP). However, there is no commonly accepted scheme to forecast the growth of the GDP of a country –i.e. to understand the dynamics of economic growth. Recently, a new discipline called Economic Complexity(EC) (Hidalgo & Hausmann, PNAS, 106(26), 10570-10575, 2009) is gaining momentum within this field, wherecomplex-systems methods are used to provide innovative ways to assess the growth potential of a country throughdata science. Within EC analyses, metrics are provided of the economic competitiveness that countries possess– hence of their potential growth – by analyzing the international trade of goods and products around the globe,focusing in particular on the products each country exports. EC metrics provide a proxy of future economicgrowth of a country by extracting the productive knowledge (consisting in human and environmental resources,capabilities and finances) that each country owns. These metrics require a simple input, represented by thebipartite network of countries and products exported. Moreover, these measures share a deep relationship withstandard centrality metrics, that can help in unveiling features of the underlying network structure (Sciarra etal., Scientific Reports, 9, 15269, 2018). Different EC metrics have been introduced, including (Tacchella et al.,Scientific reports, 2, 723, 2012).We analyze the main differences between these metrics, through the lens of complex network theory, with theaim to understand the capacity of these metrics to serve as proxies not only of economic growth, but also ofthe potential environmental footprint of each country’s economy. We exemplify our approach by consideringthe impact on water resources (in terms of water footprint) of the production and export of agricultural goods,with a special attention to examine the link between the external water footprint of a country and its economicfitness. Our results show that economic complexity can play a key role to shed light on new facets of the globalwater resources, revealing interesting relationships between economy and environment, necessary for a bettercomprehension of climate change dynamics and which may result useful for policy makers.