Economic complexity and the sustainability transition: A review of data,
  methods, and literature

Economic complexity and the sustainabilitytransition:A review of data, methods, and literatureBernardo Caldarola, Dario Mazzilli, Lorenzo Napolitano†,Aurelio Patelli, Angelica SbardellaEnrico Fermi Research Center, via Panisperna 89a, 00184, Rome (Italy)†European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC-Seville)E-mail: @cref.itAbstract. Economic Complexity (EC) methods have gained increasing popular-ity across fields and disciplines. In particular, the EC toolbox has proved particu-larly promising in the study of complex and interrelated phenomena, such as thetransition towards a greener economy. Using the EC approach, scholars have beeninvestigating the relationship between EC and sustainability, proposing to iden-tify the distinguishing characteristics of green products and to assess the readinessof productive and technological structures for the sustainability transition. Thisarticle proposes to review and summarize the data, methods, and empirical liter-ature that are relevant to the study of the sustainability transition from an ECperspective. We review three distinct but connected blocks of literature on ECand environmental sustainability. First, we survey the evidence linking measuresof EC to indicators related to environmental sustainability. Second, we review ar-ticles that strive to assess the green competitiveness of productive systems. Third,we examine evidence on green technological development and its connection tonon-green knowledge bases. Finally, we summarize the findings for each block andidentify avenues for further research in this recent and growing body of empiricalliterature.1. IntroductionThe notion of Economic Complexity (EC) has been widely used to encompass aset of methods that characterize the productive and technological composition ofarXiv:2308.07172v1  [econ.GN]  14 Aug 2023Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 2economies (countries, regions, cities) relying on complex systems science (Hidalgo andHausmann, 2009; Tacchella et al., 2012). EC methods have proved to be particularlyeffective in predicting future patterns of economic growth using information onthe export basket of countries (Tacchella et al., 2018). The key intuition behindthe EC approach is that economic development and growth are the result ofthe specialization and diversification patterns of economies, which emerge fromunderlying hidden interactions between elements in the society (Balland et al.,2022; Pugliese et al., 2019a). More specifically, EC focuses on the role playedby the accumulation of (unobserved) productive and technological capabilities indriving economic diversification and growth (Hausmann et al., 2007, 2011; Puglieseet al., 2017; Sbardella et al., 2018b). By preserving information on what economiesproduce, rather than merely how much, the EC literature is able to “describe andcompare economies in a manner that eschews aggregation” (Hausmann and Hidalgo,2011). The EC approach yields a complementary perspective on several domains ofeconomically relevant human activity (e.g. trade, technical innovation, scientificresearch) with respect to conventional (i.e. aggregate) indicators on productiveinputs or performance. This emphasis on the content of the activity baskets ofcountries or regions resonates with other approaches in economics that understandeconomic growth through the lens of sectoral allocation of productive factors, such asthe structuralist literature (Prebisch, 1950; Lewis, 1954; Hirschman, 1958; Lin et al.,2011), and that identify in the role of capabilities the main factor driving innovation,embodied in the evolutionary economics literature (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Dosiand Nelson, 1994; Teece and Pisano, 1994; Cimoli and Dosi, 1995).The quality and diversity of an economy’s productive and technological portfoliohave broader implications than simply economic growth. For instance, thecomposition of economic and technological specialization has strong implications forthe environment, as the footprint of different products and technologies can differsubstantially. By the same token, the accumulation of technological capabilities mayput countries on trajectories that can mitigate or exacerbate the current climatecrisis. In this respect, EC methods can prove particularly useful to understand andguide the sustainable transition.The transition towards a more sustainable and low-carbon socio-economicsystem is a top policy priority, with the EU Green Deal aiming at climate neutralityEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 3by 20501 , the Inflation Reduction Act in the United States (Bistline et al., 2023) andthe ambitious renewable energy targets in China (Lo, 2014). However, decarbonizingthe economy by phasing out polluting and energy-intensive industries will requireradical transformations and profound structural change at the core of socio-economicsystems. Moreover, this will have to account for the heterogeneous capacity ofgeographical areas and industries to achieve climate neutrality along with the possiblelong-lasting effects on income, spatial and environmental inequalities.To inform policy on how to address such a complex transformation, whereingeographical, structural and institutional elements interact, in the last few yearsan approach has emerged in the literature (see among others Barbieri et al., 2020,2022; Montresor and Quatraro, 2020; Santoalha and Boschma, 2021) that drawsfrom sustainability studies, evolutionary economic geography (Boschma and Frenken,2006, 2018) and EC. Embracing a complexity perspective may in fact be moreeffective than traditional approaches in accounting for the interconnected natureof this process of change (Common and Stagl, 2005) providing policy-relevant, data-driven and granular evidence to embrace socio-economic complexity at differentgeographical scales.While in the literature environmental goods and technologies have been mainlystudied as homogeneous aggregated quantities, the capacity of EC methodologies tokeep away from aggregation and to provide feasibility diagnostics at the level of singleproducts or technologies may prove extremely relevant in analyzing the potentialdirections of green development for each country or region. In fact, environmentalgoods and technologies are highly heterogeneous in terms of functions (Perruchaset al., 2020), across geographical areas and stages of the life cycle of environmentalgoods and technologies (Sbardella et al., 2018a; Barbieri et al., 2022), they encompassmany different domains of know-how (Barbieri et al., 2020) and may be linked innon-trivial ways to pre-existing knowledge as well as productive and specializationpatterns (Barbieri et al., 2020, 2022; Montresor and Quatraro, 2020).Therefore, coupling the geographical distribution of productive and technologicalcapabilities with environmental and socio-economic variables, various scholars haveapplied the economic complexity toolbox to try to answer three main broad questions:• What is the relationship between complexity and sustainability?1 https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=1596443911913&uri=CELEX%3A52019DC0640#document2Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 4• What are the properties of green products and technologies, and are theseinherently different from non-green ones?• How can we assess the readiness of national/regional knowledge bases andproductive structures for the green transition?Contributions addressing the first question investigate the empirical relationshipbetween countries’ environmental outputs, such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,and the complexity of their productive structures, assessed by focusing on theexport dimension through various EC metrics. However, these studies are far fromunanimous, as they vary in their samples or estimating methods. This yieldscontrasting results on the effect of EC on the environment, ranging from linearpositive to non-linear relationships a là Kuznets curve (1955).The second and third questions have roots in the evolutionary economicgeography literature and are more varied in terms of techniques and scalesof observation. They mainly examine the geography of green competitivenessof national/regional knowledge bases or productive structures by analysingspecialization profiles in green products or technologies. These studies also lookat different dimensions of relatedness between green and non-green technologicalor productive activities, inequality, and political support for environmental policy.As is common in the EC literature, these works especially stress the potentialcomplementarity between pre-existing capabilities and future specialization in low-carbon technologies or products.The EC framework plays a crucial role in understanding the sustainabilitytransition and in helping to answer the above research questions. One of thecharacterizing elements of the EC approach lies in the emphasis it places on the roleplayed by productive and technological capabilities in promoting advancement acrossdomains of human activity. EC recognizes the intangible nature of capabilities, but italso finds ways to uncover information on capabilities from empirical patterns presentin economic data. From the point of view of green goods and innovative activities,this implies that as countries and regions strive to move towards sustainablepractices, EC offers a framework to analyze the composition and diversificationof their economies. By doing so, the EC framework allows to identify the setof capabilities that are most conducive to green productive and technologicalspecialization. Moreover, EC recognizes that capabilities are not static but canbe accumulated over time, allowing countries to progress along the sustainabilityEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 5ladder. By leveraging their existing capabilities and building upon them, countriescan foster the innovation necessary for transitioning to more sustainable technologiesand practices. As we show in this review, economic complexity provides a valuablelens through which policymakers and researchers can understand and navigate theintricacies of the sustainability transition.This literature review aims to summarize the empirical evidence produced sofar to answer the three questions aforementioned from an EC perspective. Tothis aim, we first review the data on products and technologies used to applyEC methods to the study of the sustainability transition, highlighting drawbacksand advantages entailed by different types of data (Section 2.1). Second, weoffer a methodological contribution by attempting to unify the methods used toestimate and analyse measures of economic complexity and relatedness (Section2.2). Third, we canvas the literature that links complexity measures to the conceptof environmental sustainability, in order to summarize the debate on the role ofcomplexity in explaining environmental issues and in identifying viable avenues intothe sustainability transition (Section 3). Finally, we attempt to identify limitationsof the existing literature and methods, proposing further research avenues in the field(Section 4).2. Data and MethodsThe data employed in the EC-based analysis of the green economy are drawn fromtwo main sources: patents and trade flows. This section presents in detail the mostcommonly used datasets and classifications of green activities, firstly focusing onpatent data and secondly on trade data. This data is used in EC following a commonempirical framework: a bipartite matrix is constructed by cross-tabulating products(technologies) and geographical areas (countries, regions, cities...). The bipartitematrix is then filtered, projected and ordered in different ways, depending on thespecific purposes of the analysis. More on the methods to process the informationcontained in the bipartite matrix is explained in section 2.2.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 62.1. Data2.1.1. Patent data The two main sources of patent data used in EC studiesare PATSTAT European Patent Office (2021) and REGPAT 2. PATSTAT is acomprehensive patent database covering patent applications filed in more than 70national and international patent offices, including the most important ones – e.g.the European, US, and Japanese patent offices – in terms of the volume and relevance(as measured by received citations, a commonly used proxy for patent value) of theapplications they process. PATSTAT has been published biannually by the EuropeanPatent Office (EPO) since 2007 and has grown substantially in coverage over time.As of the latest editions, it records information on more than 100 million patentapplications filed since the late eighteenth century, which are collected in over 50million families. Whenever the information is available for a patent application,PATSTAT records, among other things, the receiving patent office, the filing date(i.e., when the patent office received the document), the technologies in which thepatent innovates (encoded in standard technology codes), and the residence of theapplicants and of the inventors at the time of filing. The geographical informationis incomplete, with the coverage varying widely across patent offices. The mostcommonly available information in this sense is the country of residence of inventorsand applicants. For some documents, more granular data is available (e.g., the fulladdress), but it is not recorded in a structured format, which makes it challengingto process at scale.REGPAT is another popular resource for patent data that is published annuallyby the OECD. It covers the subset of PATSTAT patent applications filed at theEPO since its inception in 1978. Since, for geographical reasons, the EPO attractsdisproportionately more European patent applications, it does not provide a uniformgeographical coverage beyond European borders. Furthermore, filing costs at theEPO are higher than in most national offices. This skews the sample towards “high-value” patents and, indirectly, leads to an over-representation of richer Europeancountries with respect to more peripheral ones. However, REGPAT makes up forthis shortcoming thanks to an accurate geocoding across over 5500 sub-nationalregions of the patent documents filed by applicants or inventors residing in one ofover 40 countries belonging to the following set: OECD countries, the EU, the UK,2 Available upon request at https://www.oecd.org/sti/inno/intellectual-property-statistics-and-analysis.htm#ip-dataEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 7Brazil, China, India, the Russian Federation, and South Africa3.The technological fields in which the patents recorded in PATSTAT andREGPAT innovate follow two classifications: the International Patent Classification(IPC) and the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC) 4). Both classificationsfollow a similar hierarchical structure spanning from codes associated with a verydetailed description (e.g. G02B 1/02: optical elements [. . . ] made of crystals,e.g. rock-salt) to codes aggregating many detailed technologies under a broadercommon technological area (e.g. G02: optics; G: physics). For example, at 4-digits, the classifications have around 600 unique codes , while at 8-digits there area few thousand codes (7000 in the IPC and 10000 in the CPC). Despite the strongsimilarities between the two classifications, only the CPC has a section dedicated totagging climate change mitigation and adaptation, the so-called ’Y02/Y04S’ taggingscheme nested under section Y. Table 1 reports the 1-digit codes and the titles ofthe sections comprising the IPC and CPC classifications.Figure 1 compares the coverage of PATSTAT and REGPAT in terms of patentdocument and time span. The figure shows that the two databases are quite different,in both respects. The large difference in the number of documents is due to thefact that REGPAT records patents filed only at the EPO, while PATSTAT collectsinformation from most patent offices worldwide. This is a notable difference, whichmakes REGPAT less suitable for the analysis of, for instance, smaller countries.However, the EPO tends to receive high-quality applications, making data collectedfrom it more reliable. Concerning the temporal coverage, the figure shows thatREGPAT and PATSTAT differ substantially. However, it also suggests that bothdatabases 
cover a long enough time window for all practical purposes. The coverageof REGPAT starts only in 1978, while PATSTAT records US and UK patents datingback as far as the late eighteenth century. Nevertheless, large numbers of patentshave been recorded only in recent decades. Moreover, both databases are updated tovirtually the same date (for instance, as of Summer 2022, PATSTAT covers patentapplications published up to April 2022, while REGPAT covers patent documentsmade public up to October 2021). It is worth noting that, due to the dynamics ofpatent offices and the regulations governing patent filing, there is an intrinsic lag of3 The brochure of an older version of REGPAT, available at http://econ.geo.uu.nl/crespo/tech_div/regpat_201602.pdf, provides more details on the structure of the geographical coverage4 Notice that in the literature, the abbreviation CPC is used also to refer to the Central ProductClassification, which is a classification of goods and services.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 8Table 1. Sections of the IPC and CPC classifications.†Code Title IPC CPCA Human necessities Y YB Performing operations; Transforming Y YC Chemistry; Metallurgy Y YD Textiles; Paper Y YE Fixed constructions Y YF Mechanical engineering and weapons Y YG Physics Y YH Electricity Y YY New technologies, including CCMT‡ & Smart Grids N Y†Note: the titles of F and Y sections are abbreviated for clarity. The full title of Section F isMechanical engineering, lighting, heating, weapon, blasting while the title of Section Y is Generaltagging of new technological developments; general tagging of cross-sectional technologies spanningover several sections of the ipc; technical subjects covered by former USPC cross-reference artcollections [xracs] and digests.‡Climate Change Mitigation Technology.12-18 months between when an application is received by a patent office and whenthe corresponding record appears in the database, at the end of the so-called searchphase by the patent office. During the search phase, patent offices conduct a primaryassessment of the originality of the invention and inform the applicants, who candecide to either withdraw the application thus keeping it confidential, or pursue thegrant of a patent and disclose their application to the public. In some cases, notablythe US patent office (USPTO) until the early 2000s, internal regulations used to allowthe publication of granted patents only, implying a further lag caused by the longerprocedure preceding the publication of the documents and a consistent backlog ofapplications awaiting examination. This resulted in a delay of up to 5 years duringwhich database coverage remained incomplete. The USPTO has changed its rulesallowing it to compute a complete and relatively timely patent count for disclosedpatent applications. However, some lag in coverage is inevitable. Therefore, patentcounts extracted from an edition of PATSTAT or REGPAT published in 2022 arenot reliable beyond 2018 or 2019.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 9Figure 1. Comparison of the coverage of PATSTAT (blue) and REGPAT (orange).Main plot: time series of tthe number of patent applications recorded in PATSTATand REGPAT over the period covered by both databases (1978-2022). Inset: timeseries of the number of patent applications recorded in PATSTAT over the entireperiod it covers.An invention can be submitted to different offices — e.g. to cover differentgeographical regions – by filing different applications at different points in time. Thefirst patent application filed to protect an invention is called the priority application.Subsequent applications that are related to the same invention name the sameapplications as priorities, allowing to group into the same patent family (there areover 50 million patent families in PATSTAT). Families are a useful way to grouptogether documents referring to the same innovation and are thus frequently used asthe basic unit of observation in empirical exercises.As mentioned above, PATSTAT provides limited information about theEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 10geographical location of inventors and applicants for many documents, even thoughthe database records patents filed by applicants and inventors located in more than200 countries. Instead, REGPAT offers much more detailed information, albeit ona smaller set of countries, by associating patent documents to the Territorial Level(TL) (OECD, 2020) code of the region of residence of applicants and inventors.The TL classification is defined by the OECD and covers all its members plus afew important economic actors, such as Russia, China and India. Depending onthe country, it follows a hierarchical structure that may go down to administrativeregions, provinces and urban areas. For European countries the TL follows closelythe hierarchical structure of the 2013 edition of the Nomenclature of Territorial Unitsfor Statistics5) (NUTS), developed by Eurostat. Instead, in the US, progressivelyfiner levels of the classification identify states, economic areas and counties, that donot follow a nested structure.To attribute a geographical location to patents one can leverage the inventors’ aswell as the applicants’ residence information. Either can be more suitable dependingon the research question. However, the former is often preferred as a proxy forthe location of inventive capabilities because it is assumed that inventors (who arealways physical persons) tend to live close to where they perform their duties. Onthe contrary, applicants (who are in many cases companies) may choose to assign tothe corporate headquarters a patent that was developed in a subsidiary located in adifferent country or region for business-related reasons.Multiple inventors or applicants can be linked to the same patent application orpatent family. In such cases, one may choose between counting the patent fractionallyand counting patents in full, when it comes to assigning patents to geographical areas.Full counting counts as a unit of every pair of patent documents and territorialunits hosting at least one inventor. As a consequence of this double counting,the weight attributed to a patent (and even more for a family) depends on thenumber of inventors. Instead, in fractional counting, each patent (or each familyof patents, if families are considered as basic units) sums to 1, and each territorialunit having an inventor gets a fractional weight inversely proportional to the totalnumber of inventors. There is some debate in the literature concerning the bestapproach (Waltman, 2016). However, in economic complexity applications, fractional5 https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/gisco/geodata/reference-data/administrative-units-statistical-units/nutsEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 11counting is generally the preferred approach.Table 2. CPC Y02/Y04S (2018) tagging scheme. Source: EPO (European PatentOffice, 2018).Class or Subclass Title and descriptionY02TECHNOLOGIES OR APPLICATIONS FOR MITIGATION OR ADAPTATIONAGAINST CLIMATE CHANGEY02A Technologies for adaptation to climate changeY02BClimate change mitigation technologies related to buildings, e.g. housing, house appliances orrelated end-user applications, including the residential sectorY02C Capture, storage, sequestration or disposal of greenhouse gasesY02DClimate change mitigation technologies in information and communication technologies,i.e. information and communication technologies aiming at the reduction of their own energy useY02EReduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, related to energy generation,transmission or distribution, including renewable energy, efficient combustion,biofuels, efficient transmission and distribution, energy storage, and hydrogen technologyY02P Climate change mitigation technologies in the production or processing of goodsY02T Climate change mitigation technologies related to transportation, e.g. hybrid vehiclesY02W Climate change mitigation technologies related to wastewater treatment or waste managementY04INFORMATION OR COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES HAVING AN IMPACTON OTHER TECHNOLOGY AREASY04SSystems integrating technologies related to power network operation, communication orinformation technologies for improving the electrical power generation, transmission,distribution, management or usage, i.e. smart grid technologies including hybrid vehiclesinteroperability.The identification of environment-related technologies within patent classificationsThe contributions about eco-innovation presented in this review rely mainly on theY02/Y04S tagging scheme of the CPC and the Env-Tech classification based on amixture of IPC and CPC codes, which cover a wide range of a wide range technologiesrelated to sustainability objectives, including energy efficiency in buildings, energygeneration from renewable sources, sustainable mobility, and smart grids.In response to the increasing attention and concerns about climate changemitigation and renewable energy generation, there was a large increase in theEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 12number and scope of patent applications in environment-related domains in therecent past (European Patent Office, 2013). However, searching for environment-related patent documents was not straightforward at the beginning because adedicated classification system for sustainable technologies was not available. In fact,before 2011, no specific branch of the IPC or of other national/regional technologyclassification systems covered environment-related inventions.A first step in this direction was the creation in 2011 of the Y02 class theEPO, in cooperation with the United Nations Environmental Program (UNEP)and the International Centre on Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD), tocomplement the IPC and the European Classification System.6 From the beginning,the purpose of the Y02 class was to tag CCMT patent documents by means of searchstrategies and algorithms implemented by expert examiners and that can be re-runperiodically to update the classes (Veefkind et al., 2012, p.1). The Y02 schemeinitially covered only patent documents related to CCMTs in the energy sector andwas later extended also to other types of mitigation technologies. At the time, itprovided an additional classification for patent documents next to the IPC and wassearchable through PATSTAT or Espacenet. This effort by the EPO constituted amajor advancement for the study of green innovation both from an academic andpolicy perspective, as it has allowed also non-specialists to easily identify CCMTs.In 2013, the European Patent Office and the United States Patent andTrademark Office (USPTO) agreed to harmonize their patent classification practicesand developed the Cooperative Patent Classification (CPC). Since then, the CPC hasbecome increasingly popular as a classification standard and has been complementingor substituting the IPC in a growing number of patent offices worldwide. Asillustrated in table 1, two types of codes can be found in the CPC classification:codes starting with the letters A to H – similar to IPC codes and representing thetraditional classification of technologies; and codes starting with Y, which are used totag cross-sectional technologies that “do not fit in a single other section of the IPC”,although "the tagging codes of this section do not in any way replace the classificationor indexing codes of the other sections”7. Therefore, the Y classification scheme is6 The European Classification System (ECLA) is a former patent classification system maintainedby the European Patent Office (EPO), which has been replaced by the Cooperative PatentClassification (CPC) in following its introduction in 2013.7 USPTO-CPC Section Y. https://www.uspto.gov/web/patents/classification/cpc/html/cpc-Y.htmlEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 13used to tag patent documents that are already classified or indexed somewhere else inthe classification. In addition to the Y02 class, the new subclass Y04S dedicated tosmart grids was integrated in the CPC section Y. More in detail, as shown in Table2, the Y02 class consists of more than 1000 tags related to sustainable technologiesorganized in 9 sub-classes.With the aim of maximizing the informative content on eco-innovation presentboth in the IPC and CPC classifications, in 2015 the OECD (Haščič and Migotto,2015) developed Env-Tech, an expert-based catalogue of environment-relatedtechnologies based on the IPC classification and lastly updated in 2016 (OECD,2016), which can be used to tag green patent documents in PATSTAT or other patentdata-sets. Env-Tech identifies 94 environment-related technology areas that group4- to 16-digit IPC and CPC codes, building on the CPC Y02 class whenever possible.The catalogue relies on a keyword search strategy “that identifies the relevant patentdocuments using alphanumeric symbols of the IPC or CPC systems [. . . ] whichcorrespond to the target environmental technology field” (Haščič and Migotto, 2015,p.19) that is meaningful for policymakers. The process of selection is carried out withtest searches on each class individually, or by reviewing the class description. When itis not possible to identify single IPC/CPC classes that portray alone the technologicalfield of interest, it employs a combination of different patent classes. Env-Techprovides a categorization of green technologies that do not cover exclusively CCMTsand that encompasses also environmental management and water-related adaptationtechnologies (class 1 and 2). It does so by mixing codes at different aggregation levelsfrom both the CPC and IPC classification (which is still widely used by many patentoffices around the world).While widening the object of analysis is undoubtedly commendable,unfortunately, it makes the catalogue very vulnerable to patent document re-classification. In fact, while the additional information may have been useful forthe researchers working with versions of PATSTAT prior or contemporaneous to2016, the year up to which Env-Tech is updated, using a combination of differentIPC and CPC codes may constitute a drawback when working with more recentversions of PATSTAT. This is because the classification of the codes comprisingany technology – especially for finer-grained codes – changes over time, possiblyreclassifying past inventions into new codes. Furthermore, being fixed in time, Env-Tech not only it suffers from the reclassification of previous inventions, but it alsofails to consider newer patent applications. Patent classifications are not slowlyEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 14varying, like industry classifications where sectors are well defined and changes inthe classification take place approximately every decade. Instead, technology codesare revised at least once a year to take into account new technical advances, as wellas to improve the search for the prior art that the patent officers use to establish theapplication’s degree of innovation. For instance, when a patent code becomes toopopulated it can be retroactively split into new codes. Let us consider a fictitiouscase in the domain of battery technologies, that are present in several Env-Techsub-classes. Following new technical developments this kind of patent could be splitinto several subcategories (e.g. lithium or nickel batteries) and new classes mightbe added when batteries that use new materials are introduced (e.g. graphite).If Env-Tech photographed a moment in time in which only lithium and nickelbatteries were present in the classifications and not graphite batteries, it would failto capture the state of the art. Moreover, the Y04S subclass covering smart grids,which at the end of 2016 comprised 54000 patent documents (Angelucci et al., 2018),is not included in the Env-Tech catalogue. This might lead to an underestimationof the inventive efforts in smart grids, despite the fact that Y04S codes heavilyoverlaps with Y02 codes. By contrast, the Y02/Y04S codes are part of the CPCsection Y and are therefore robust to changes in the CPC classification, are moreuser-friendly and readily usable for the relevant data can be directly extracted byPATSTAT with no need for intermediate steps. Lastly, another limitation of Env-Tech is that, due to its 
limited granularity (94 categories at the most disaggregatedlevel), it does not allow very detailed studies on green technology development anddiffusion, an obstacle for carrying out economic complexity analyses that are hingedon the possibility of developing algorithmic and network tools able to capture relevantparameters on the technological potential of geographic areas at very fine-grainedlevels.2.1.2. Trade data Since The environmental goods and services industry manual fordata collection and analysis was published by the OECD in 1999 (OECD, 1999), awide array of lists and taxonomies of green products has been proposed.Here we briefly discuss the lists that are most commonly used inEconomic Complexity analyses, highlighting the main critical issues in classifyingenvironmental goods. Readers should keep in mind that the EC literature hasfocused, especially in the earlier works, on establishing the level of complexityand growth potential of an economy by extracting information from its tradeEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 15specialization profile. In order to do so, a harmonized global classification ofproducts with a uniform interpretation worldwide has been crucial for developing theframework. The Harmonised System (HS) classification satisfies these requirementsand has been the most widely used in the field. This is a standardized numericalmethod of classifying traded products. It is used by customs authorities to identifyproducts, and it is maintained by the World Customs Organization (WCO) whichupdates every five years. HS comprises more than 5,000 commodity subheadingswhich are identified by a 6-digit code and arranged according to a nested structuregoing up to 96 2-digit Chapters and 1-digit 21 Sections.The first issue to take into account when constructing a comprehensive greenproduct classification is in the very nature of the HS classification system, whichwas not conceptualized for accommodating a green/non-green dichotomy. Whilstmonitoring the trade of environmental goods is a central objective in the global policyagenda (World Trade Organisation, 2001; Sauvage, 2014) and the introduction inthe Harmonized System of several 6-digit subheadings including new environmentalgoods was announced (Steenblik, 2020) in 2020, currently, the World CustomsOrganization is slowly addressing this issue by updating the HS system with morecodes for green products. However, the updated classification is not yet available.Therefore, a clear-cut identification of environmental goods within existing productclassifications may at times prove to be a difficult task. For instance, up until recently,it was impossible to distinguish between combustion engines and electrical cars.Other classifications or surveys exist, which are more focused on the environmentalaspects of products or their final use. Nevertheless, these classifications do notpresent the standardization and granularity properties required by EC techniques.A second crucial point for a green classification is a unanimous definition ofgreen products. This clearly depends on the specific needs it should address: forinstance, different requirements need to be satisfied in order to fulfil regulatory oracademic purposes or to define incentives and tax reliefs aimed at using renewableenergy sources, or environmental practices in buildings.While stressing a series of open questions, partially still unanswered, in a 1999report by the OECD (OECD, 1999) the environmental goods and services industrywas defined as "activities which produce goods and services to measure, prevent,limit, minimize or correct environmental damage to water, air and soil, as well asproblems related to waste, noise and eco-systems. This includes cleaner technologies,products and services that reduce environmental risk and minimize pollution andEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 16resource use". In the report, a list of 121 environmental goods satisfying thisdefinition was proposed. More recently, according to the IMF:8 “environmental goodsinclude both goods connected to environmental protection -— such as goods relatedto pollution management and resource management -— and adapted goods -— whichare goods that have been specifically modified to be more environmentally friendlyor cleaner”. In 2009 the World Trade Organization (WTO) published a list of greenproducts (Organisation, 2009) which is broader than the OECD list, comprising480 products. The aim of such a list was to agree upon a wide classification forpolicy implications, evaluation, and tariff regularization in international trade. Whilethe list is comprehensive, many inaccuracies and biases have been pointed out byEUROSTAT in a report published in the same year (EUROSTAT, 2009). The WTOalso published two shorter ’friend’ and ’core’ lists composed respectively of 154 and 26products. Similar efforts were made in 2010 by the OECD for the 2010 Toronto G20summit which proposed an updated list of 150 Plurilateral Environmental Goods andServices (PEGS). In 2012, the Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) (APEC,2012) has put forward a list of 54 environmental goods subject to reduced tariffs.Finally, in 2014, the OECD published the most recent list of green products, theCombined List of Environmental Goods (CLEG) (Sauvage, 2014). CLEG comprises248 products identified by combining and revising the APEC, the WTO ’friend’ andthe PEGS lists, which cover more than 150 products. However, CLEG focuses mainlyon goods of relevance to tackling climate change.Regardless of the specific definition, two main pitfalls are shared by all greenproduct classifications:• Final use: for many products, it is not possible to know their actual final use.Many commodities labelled as green (e.g. filters, pumps and pipes) may be usedalso for non-environmental purposes. While statistics can be computed basedon surveys, their reliability on a global scale is still unclear.• Greener products: depending on the goal of the study/application one couldconsider products that are less raw material intensive, have longer life spans,are more energy efficient or are easier to dispose of. Clearly, these properties8 The definition of environmental goods of the IMF Climate Change Indicator Dashboard,“Trade in Environmental Goods" data-set can be found at: https://climatedata.imf.org/datasets/8636ce866c8a404b8d9baeaffa2c6cb3_0/explore, where international trade flows inenvironmental goods – defined according to the OECD 1999’s list (OECD, 1999) as updated by theIMF – are reported.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 17depend on the comparison with other products belonging to the same category.However, such comparisons are, even in principle, very difficult to carry out.From these two issues, a clear trade-off between accuracy and comprehensivenessarises. Moreover and finally, any list of environmental products cannot be consideredfinal and, as the HS classification, needs constant updates and revision.2.2. MethodsIn the Economic Complexity framework, economic performance is seen as the resultof the accumulation of non-tradeable inputs and productive capabilities. EconomicComplexity can be seen as an indirect measure of the capability endowment of acountry. The notion of capabilities was developed at the firm level in the evolutionaryeconomics literature to describe the dynamic know-how allowing firms to developand introduce new products and services in the market (Penrose, 1959; Teece et al.,1997, 1994). In the EC literature productive capabilities describe location-basedattributes, which encompass further intangible aspects contributing to building andeffectively exploiting productive efficiency, such as the institutional setups, educationsystems, policies, and infrastructures needed by a country to learn how to produceand export competitively more complex products (Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003;Hausmann et al., 2005; Sutton and Trefler, 2016). Information on capabilities isgathered from a binary network based on international trade data that connectscountries to the product they export with comparative advantage.In the following, we present the main metrics and tools available in theframework of Economic Complexity.2.2.1. Complexity measures The basic intuition of the EC approach is that specificactivities, such as export production, labour sectors, patenting activity or scientificresearch, are important because they constitute different learning opportunities anddevelopment possibilities. EC explicitly builds on the heterogeneity and interactionsbetween different economic actors, assuming that the level of technological andscientific knowledge of a geographical area cannot be reached at an intensive level:knowledge grows not by accumulating ‘more’ of the same, but by adding new anddifferent elements to existing capacities.In order to do so, analyses in Economic Complexity often start from theobservation of empirical bipartite networks connecting geographical areas – be theyEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 18countries, regions or cities – to different types of economically relevant activities –such as patenting (Sbardella et al., 2018a), goods production (Tacchella et al., 2012)or scientific research (Patelli et al., 2023) – in which they are competitive. Thesebipartite networks are typically assessed by evaluating the comparative advantage ofthe geographical area in the selected activity, using Balassa’s Revealed ComparativeAdvantage (RCA) index (Balassa, 1965). The index is interpreted as a proxy forabove-average competitiveness in any given activity. RCA measures the share ofproduction of a region in activity compared to a reference distribution, typically theglobal share. In formula, the RCA of a geographic region g in an activity sector aon the activity W , can be written as follows:[RCA]ga =Wga(∑g′a′ Wg′a′)(∑a′ Wga′)(∑g′ Wg′a)=Wga∑a′ Wga′/∑g′ Wg′a∑g′a′ Wg′a′. (1)Despite the simplicity of the RCA as an index of competitiveness, and the criticism itreceived in favor of other measures such as the Absolute Advantage, the RCA indexand its refinements (see Bruno et al., 2023) remain the workhorse for binarizing theadjacency matrices of bipartite networks in the EC literature.The RCA indicator assigns a real and positive value to each combination ofgeographical area and activity. The resulting distribution of RCA values is skewedwith large tails (Patelli et al., 2022). Dealing with continuous values with a largevariability can be impractical for various applications which often only require theinformation on being competitive or not. Therefore, the RCA matrix is binarizedby setting a threshold value, usually 1. Therefore, if the RCA value is above 1, it isassumed that the region has a comparative advantage in such activity, and a value1 is inserted in the matrix cell, and zero otherwiseMga ={1 if [RCA]ga ≥ 10 otherwise(2)Geographical area g has an RCA of 1 in activity a if the weight of a in the basket ofactivities of g is the same as the global weight of activity a relative to all activities.Though the unit threshold has a clear focal value which has made it the standardin the literature, different values might be appropriate depending on the particularapplication.The first developed indicator addressing the evaluation of the effective, orgeneral, diversification of a country is the Method of Reflections (Hidalgo andEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 19Hausmann, 2009), which proposed an iterative procedurek(n)g =1k0g∑a Mgak(n−1)a ,k(n)a =1k0a∑g Mgak(n−1)g .(3)The terms kng and kna are the generalized diversifications of geographical areasand activities at the n-th iteration. The initial conditions are k0g =∑aMga andk0a =∑g Mga, corresponding to the normal definition of diversification and ubiquity.The idea behind the method is that the complexity of a region, interpreted asits generalized diversification, is driven by the average complexity of the activitiesit performs and that the average complexity of activity is driven by the averagecomplexity of the regions with a comparative advantage in it. Hence, the complexityis standardized (i.e. removing the mean and dividing by the standard deviation).Since the iterative model in equation (3) has a trivial solution (Caldarelli et al., 2012;Kemp-Benedict, 2014), the authors aligned on a more practical definition of the indexbased on the standardization of the eigenvalue associated with the second largesteigenvalue of the matrices derived from the Method of Reflections. The new indexis called Economic Complexity Index (ECI) (Hausmann et al., 2011, 2014). Mealyet al. (2018) showed that ECI is equivalent to an approximated solution of a spectralclustering problem. Effectively, ECI divides countries into two different groups withsimilar export baskets. However, ECI presents a conceptual drawback due to thefact that the complexities are defined by averages (Pietronero et al., 2017). ECIdefines geographical complexity as the average product complexity of a geography’sbasket, and product complexity as the average complexity of the geographical unitsspecialized in that product. But averages create the problem that the complexityincreases if you do something with a higher than average level of complexity butdecreases if you do something with a lower level of complexity. By absurd, therefore,it could be that two countries, one that produces everything and one that makesonly one product of average complexity, have the same complexity. This thoughtexperiment shows that looking at averages isn’t a very effective method when youwant to analyze cumulative quantities like capabilities.Furthermore, ECI is based on the idea that countries are diversified.However,there is more to the binary M matrices than just the diversification of the regionsrepresented by their rows. In particular, the M matrices are usually nested acrossdomains of activity (e.g. irrespective of whether the columns of M representEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 20products, technologies or scientific fields) (Patelli et al., 2022) and scales ofanalysis(Pugliese et al., 2019b; Laudati et al., 2023) The concept of nestednessoriginates from ecology (Atmar and Patters, 1993) and refers to the observation that,in response to evolutionary pressure, species co-existing within an ecosystem occupydifferent niches in a predictable manner whereby more generalist species occupy mostor all niches, while progressively more specialized species tend to occupy a subset ofthe niches. This results in ecosystems that can the represented by presence-absencematrix such that species and niches can be ordered in a triangular arrangement inwhich the ones cluster in the top left part and the zeros cluster in the bottom right.9Therefore, nestedness can be viewed as the footprint of a complex evolutionaryprocess, and, as such, it can be also framed in the evolutionary economics traditionthat has more room for path-dependency and complexity as driving forces ofeconomic dynamic (Dosi and Nelson, 1994; Nelson and Winter, 1982). In this context,nestedness means that less diversified regions typically have a comparative advantageover the activities pursued by more diversified regions, resulting in the emergenceof a hierarchical model represented by triangular matrices (Cristelli et al., 2015).It should be noted that the presence of nestedness is an indication that we are inthe presence of a more correlated system that cannot be easily described through asimple linear model and averages.A more suitable model for the characterization of nested patterns is the Fitnessand Complexity metrics (Tacchella et al., 2012). The Fitness of a region is asum of the Complexities of all the activities pursued, thus expanding the activitybasket increases the Fitness proportionally. The extensive nature of the fitness iscomplemented by the definition of the Complexity as driven mainly by the Fitnessof the less competitive regions performing such activity. Operationally, the Fitnessand Complexity algorithm finds the fixed point ofF̃ (n)g =∑a MgaQ(n−1)a F(n)g =F̃(n)g⟨F̃ (n)g ⟩gQ̃(n)a =1∑g′ Mg′a1F(n)g′Q(n)a =Q̃(n)a⟨Q̃(n)a ⟩a. (4)The normalization step is found to be unnecessary for the evaluation of the fixedpoint (Mazzilli et al., 2022) but helps in the 
numerical procedures and the stability9 This pattern has been observed also in studies of prey-predator networks and plant-pollinatorsystems.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 21of the code.The rationale of the algorithm is that the Fitness of the geographical areasunder analysis and the Complexity of the activities in which they are specializedcan be determined recursively by taking advantage of the information providedby the composition of their productive or technological portfolio. In particular, ageographical area with a more advanced set of capabilities will have a more diversifiedportfolio of activities, spanning from the most to the least complex ones, and willtherefore have a higher Fitness score. In turn, complex activities are rare and appearalmost exclusively in the portfolio of high-fitness territories. Consequently, a regionwith low fitness has a smaller endowment of capabilities and thus operates exclusivelyin less complex (green and non-green) domains. Further, Fitness and Complexity arepotential functions, related to the bipartite network Mcp, which defines a forbiddenregion of the matrix given by the requirement of efficiency in the allocation ofresources of countries and products (Mazzilli et al., 2022).Fitness and ECI have in common that both are relative measures based onthe bipartite network at a given snapshot of the economic system under analysis.Therefore, their magnitudes cannot be compared longitudinally across time sincethe networks change. This is an issue not often discussed in the literature but thatis a rising concern when the metrics are used as variables for regressions. Indeed, itis possible to overcome this issue by setting a reference scale (Mazzilli et al., 2022),i.e. by assigning to a reference country a fixed value, or by adding a dummy countrythat is always specialised in all activities.Another frequent issue that appears in the Economic Complexity literature is theanalysis of the systems across different geographical scales. Often, the data at lowerscales does not cover the whole system but only parts of it and the quality of the datais lower since volumes are smaller and errors become more relevant. For example,this is a general problem in the analysis of technological outputs. The availabledata often allows the evaluation of the patenting activity at the level of regions orcities, but many cities do not produce more than a few patents per year. In orderto evaluate the Fitness of regions, it is preferable to compute the Complexity ofeconomic activities at the country level where the data has the better signal-to-noiseratio and to plug the results in the first term of equation 4 to compute the Fitnessof regions. We refer to this measure as "exogenous fitness" and in principle, thesame philosophy can be implemented with ECI by applying the line of the Methodof Reflections in equation (3).Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 22As far as this work is concerned, the term Green Fitness is often used. Thisterm refers to Fitness computed on technological codes taken from the classificationof CCMT technologies (Y02 - Y04S, see section 2.1 on data). At the country level,the fixed point of equation (4) is calculated using only data on the above mentionedtechnological codes. At the regional level, due to the high fragmentation of the data,it is necessary to resort to the Exogenous Fitness described above.2.2.2. Relatedness Another set of techniques from the Economic Complexitytoolbox aims at estimating the relatedness between activities, e.g. between pairsof products (Hidalgo, 2009; Zaccaria et al., 2014), by using product-level export datato measure relatedness through statistically significant patterns of co-exporting in theinternational trade network. This is done relying on the assumption that countriesthat are able to successfully export a product have developed a set of capabilitiesthat would enable them to diversify into related goods. This measure of relatedness,or proximity, between two products is based on the observation of their empiricalco-occurrences in the export basket of different countries and is connected to theprobability that having a comparative advantage in the first product will also leadto a comparative advantage in the second. These analytical tools can be tracedback to Jaffe (1986) and to the measure of corporate coherence introduced by Teeceand Pisano (1994) and can be used also to estimate relatedness between technologiesBreschi et al. (2003); Napolitano et al. (2018), or between a technology and a product(Pugliese et al., 2019a; de Cunzo et al., 2022) – see also Tacchella et al. (2021) for amulti-product, non-linear approach based on machine learning.In more technical terms, relatedness is a measure of the pairwise similaritybetween activities. It is usually represented as a network of connected activities,where the links express the possible degree of similarity. There are several methodsto evaluate the similarities between activities, resulting in different and heterogeneousnetworks that cannot always be easily compared. However, most of them presenta core-periphery structure, with hubs and leafs associated with similar types ofactivities or arranged into meaningful communities.The first approach to relatedness in the EC literature is the Product Space,developed by Hidalgo et al. (2007) and based on exported products. The similitudebetween products is evaluated using the proximity, a measure of normalized exportEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 23co-occurrence pairs, mathematically defined as (Hidalgo, 2009):ϕpp′ = min{∑cMcpMc,p′∑c Mcp,∑cMcpMcp′∑c Mcp′}. (5)Originally, proximity was interpreted as the "conditional probability of exportinggood product p given that one exports good p’" (Hidalgo et al., 2007) 10. In thevisualization of the Product Space, the network is typically obtained by pruning allthe links with proximity below a certain value (in the original work the threshold was0.55 (Hidalgo et al., 2007)). Intuitively, products that share similar inputs will besituated close to each other in the network and, once we have filtered the empiricalco-occurrences with the null model, proximity indicates a relatively high probabilityof jumping from a product to a neighbouring one. Therefore, its observation allowsus to trace the most profitable trajectories to enter into a new production line onthe basis of the pre-existing endowment of productive capabilities.A more statistically sound approach is given by the evaluation of thesimilarity between pairs of activities through the statistical validation of the assistmatrix (Pugliese et al., 2019a; Sbardella et al., 2022). This framework introducesthe idea of studying the co-occurrence within the same geographical area of exportedproducts at different points in time. Indeed, it is possible that when a country isable to be competitive in a given activity, the available portfolio of capabilities maybe important to become competitive in a new activity after some time. The assistmatrix estimates the probability of having a comparative advantage in one activityin a given year, conditional on having a comparative advantage in another activityin a previous year; typically a lag of 5 years is considered. The formula of the Assistmatrix isBαβaa′(y1, y2) =∑gMαga(y1)uαa (y1)Mβga′(y2)dβg (y2), uαa =∑gMαga, dαg =∑aMαga. (6)The labels a refer to an activity, the label g refers to a geographical region, and yrefers to a year and Baa′ is a conditional probability, since∑a′ Baa′ = 1, 0 ≤ Baa′ ≤ 1.The Greek labels α and β indicate the possibility that the matrices are not relatedto the same set of activities. For instance, it is possible to consider the assist matrix10Remarkably, proximity cannot be confused with a conditional probability. It is true that eachvalue of ϕpp′ is bounded to 1 and is real and positive, but a conditional probability, i.e. P (A|B),requires that∑A P (A|B) = 1. Instead,∑p′ ϕpp′ depends on the dimension of the network (thelinear sizes of Mga) and is typically larger than 1.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 24between technologies and export goods, rising the analysis to interaction amongdifferent layers of economic activities.However, the assist matrix, like any other similarity measure, suffers from theproblem that the relatedness networks are based on nested networks where diversifiedactors are active in most of the activities. As a consequence, a co-occurrence isnot informative per se: it may in fact be due to the ubiquity of a technologicalfield across geographical areas or may take place in a highly diversified area, wherealmost all products are represented. To evaluate whether the probabilities containedin the Assist Matrix are significant indicators of a capability spillover, one needs anull-model that discounts the fact that co-occurrences can be random and are morelikely the more two activities are ubiquitous across areas (Cimini et al., 2019). Inother words, according to the null hypothesis, the co-occurrences of above-averageactivity in the technology and labor layers are random and are determined only bythe diversification of the geographical area and the ubiquity of the technological field.A null model used in the literature to assess the statistical significance of theconditional probabilities Baa′(y1, y2) is the Bipartite Configuration Model (BiCM)(Saracco et al., 2015, 2017), a maximum-entropy approach for the randomization ofbipartite networks. The BiCM allows to generate M̃α(y1) and M̃β(y2), randomizedversions of the empirical bipartite matrices (M) defined in Equation (6), in which theelements are reshuffled randomly while preserving the degree distributions – i.e. thediversification of the geographical areas and the ubiquity of the technological fields.By applying Equation 6 to a suitably large number of the reshuffled matrices,it is possible to obtain a large set of realizations of the null-model assist matricesB̃(y1, y2) that we use to test on the empirical data the null hypothesis. Hence, weselect the pairs (a, a′) that belongs to the statistically validated network B̄ at thelevel of significance considered.3. Review of the literatureThe data and methods described in the previous section are at the core of the growingbody of empirical literature that has studied the sustainability transition using theEC framework. In this section, we will review this body of literature, which wehave divided in three main blocks. The first block includes contributions that haveexplored the association between complexity metrics at the geographical level (mainlycountries and regions) and variables related to environmental sustainability, such asEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 25aggregate CO2 and Greenhouse Gases (GHG) emissions. The second block focuseson the identification of green products, aiming to measure the green potential forgreen diversification based on export patterns. The third block is constituted byempirical articles that use patent data to assess the readiness of regions for the greentransition based on their existing technological capabilities, and at examining thecomplementarity between green and non-green technologies.3.1. Economic Complexity and the environmentEC indices have been widely used by academics and policymakers to predict economicgrowth (Hidalgo and Hausmann, 2009; Tacchella et al., 2012; Cristelli et al., 2013;Tacchella et al., 2018). However, the pursuit of economic growth has been put underscrutiny by academics and society alike, due to the evidence that associates economicgrowth – measured in terms of GDP – to environmental degradation (Raworth, 2017;IPCC, 2022). Since the measurement of EC relies heavily on the nature of theproducts exported by countries or regions, which in turn impact the environmentwith different intensity (as they embody different levels of greenhouse gases, havedifferent energy requirements, and produce more or less polluting byproducts), therehas been growing interest in understanding the relationship between the complexityof countries’ productive structures and environmental degradation. An ever-growingbody of literature (Table 3) has investigated this relationship, looking especially atthe export dimension of complexity and at country-level measures of environmentaldegradation.One strand of this literature assumes a linear relationship between EC andenvironmental impacts, producing mixed evidence. In a rather comprehensivestudy, Romero and Gramkow (2021) analyse the relationship between 67 countries’complexity levels and their CO2 emissions, measured by aggregate, per capita andproduct-specific emissions. The latter is proxied by the Product Emission IntensityIndex (PEI), which averages the emissions of the countries exporting a productwith comparative advantage – following a methodology similar to Hartmann et al.(2017). The study finds that lagged ECI is associated with a reduction of bothemissions intensity and per capita, and that lower emissions are associated withmore interconnected (complex) products.Looking exclusively at OECD countries, Dogan et al. (2021) also find a positiverelationship between economic complexity and the reduction of CO2 emissionsEconomic complexity and the sustainability transition 26between 1990-2014. In addition, the authors show that the complexity of exportsinteracts positively with the consumption of renewable energy, contributing to amitigation of environmental degradation in high income countries.However, studies on the relationship between EC and environmental indicatorsare quite heterogeneous in terms of the data and the analytical techniques theyemploy. As a consequence, comparing their results is not always straightforward.Boleti et al. (2021) rely on a measure of environmental performance (including:emissions indicators for different pollutants; effects of pollution on human healthand environmental degradation; and the effectiveness of environmental policies) toshow that increased complexity is associated with better environmental performanceacross 88 low and high income countries over a (short) period spanning between2002 and 2012. However, in the same period, higher complexity is also associatedto worse air quality, measured in terms of exposure to CO2, PM2.5, methane, andnitrous oxide.Neagu and Teodoru (2019) examine the heterogeneous effects of EC ongreenhouse gases in European countries. Their work shows that higher EC ispositively liked to the growth of emission of greenhouse gases by countries, althoughthis happens faster for countries with relatively lower levels of economic complexity.These results are consistent with other studies focusing exclusively on the mostcomplex countries: using time-series estimation techniques, Martins et al. (2021)find that higher EC is positively associated, in an unidirectional way, the levels ofCO2 emissions in the top 7 countries in the EC ranking. Nevertheless, integration ininternational trade has mitigated such negative effects, allowing early industrializersto shift towards knowledge-intensive, less polluting tasks. Similarly, Rafique et al.(2022) resort to dynamic panel data estimation techniques to find that ECI –along with urbanization and export growth – is positively linked to the ecologicalfootprint11 in the top 10 complex countries.The mixed evidence on the relationship between EC and environmentalsustainability could also be explained by the fact that such linkage may be non-linear. It has been argued that countries increase their environmental impact asthey industrialize, eventually reaching a peak in their CO2 emissions per capita.However, as they move towards more sophisticated activities and services, emissions11The authors rely on an index – the Ecological Footprint Index – which includes factors such asarea occupied by forests, cropland, grazing, built-up land, fishing, and CO2 emissions.Economic complexity and the sustainability transition 27per capita start to decrease, while GDP keeps growing. The reversed U-shape ofthe relationship between GDP and CO2 emissions has been named EnvironmentalKuznets Curve (EKC) (Grossman and Krueger, 1991; Selden and Song, 1994;Grossman and Krueger, 1995), building on the work by Kuznets (1955), whoobserved the same relationshi