'Amalgamation of Export with Import Information: The Economic Complexity Index as a Coherent Driver of Sustainability’

Zurich Open Repository andArchiveUniversity of ZurichMain LibraryStrickhofstrasse 39CH-8057 Zurichwww.zora.uzh.chYear: 2021’Amalgamation of Export with Import Information: The EconomicComplexity Index as a Coherent Driver of Sustainability’Cakir, Benjamin ; Aerni, Philipp ; Schluep, Isabelle ; Cakir, IsaAbstract: Countries that achieve economic complexity in a holistic way are well-prepared to respond toexternal shocks through internal processes that may also improve their resilience. This article suggeststhat the Economic Complexity Index (ECI) can capture this ‘resilience dimension’ of complex economiesand assesses their contribution to sustainable change through the amalgamation of export and importinformation. This novel methodological approach incorporates import information by applying amal-gamation on a pre S-Level, which is based on the Lie-Trotter methodology, inducing a Random Walkon a Graph. In the empirical part, this procedure is examined. It shows that the ECI ranking maynot always reflect the underlying internal economic complexity of a country, and with it, the country’sresilience and contribution to sustainable change. The novel approach is to some extent comparable withthe degree of eligibility criteria of the original ECI and consistent with the organic evolutionary characterof complex economies. After translating the ECI framework into its stochastic counterpart, the proofsof its interpretation in statistic and probabilistic terms, and its relationship to the Shannon Entropy areconducted. Coherency conditions of sustainability as further eligibility criteria are formulated and thedegree of coherency of the ECI is investigated. In view of the challenges related to data preparation, wesuggest applying the approach to a broader set of data including import information in order to gainadditional insights in a country’s internal economic complexity and resilienceDOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042049Posted at the Zurich Open Repository and Archive, University of ZurichZORA URL: https://doi.org/10.5167/uzh-205218Journal ArticlePublished Version  The following work is licensed under a Creative Commons: Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)License.Originally published at:Cakir, Benjamin; Aerni, Philipp; Schluep, Isabelle; Cakir, Isa (2021). ’Amalgamation of Export withImport Information: The Economic Complexity Index as a Coherent Driver of Sustainability’. Sustain-ability, 13(4/2049):1-71.DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042049sustainabilityArticleAmalgamation of Export with Import Information: TheEconomic Complexity Index as a Coherent Driverof SustainabilityBenjamin Cakir 1, Isabelle Schluep 2, Philipp Aerni 2 and Isa Cakir 2,*Citation: Cakir, B.; Schluep, I.; Aerni,P.; Cakir, I. Amalgamation of Exportwith Import Information: TheEconomic Complexity Index as aCoherent Driver of Sustainability.Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042049Academic Editor: Anna VisviziReceived: 18 December 2020Accepted: 6 February 2021Published: 14 February 2021Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutralwith regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional affil-iations.Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.This article is an open access articledistributed under the terms andconditions of the Creative CommonsAttribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).1 Institute of Mathematics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland;benjamin.cakir@uzh.ch2 Center for Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability CCRS, University of Zurich, Zähringerstrasse 24,8001 Zurich, Switzerland; isabelle.schluep@ccrs.uzh.ch (I.S.); philipp.aerni@ccrs.uzh.ch (P.A.)* Correspondence: to: isa.cakir@ccrs.uzh.ch; Tel.: +41-44-634-59-27Abstract: Countries that achieve economic complexity in a holistic way are well-prepared to respondto external shocks through internal processes that may also improve their resilience. This articlesuggests that the Economic Complexity Index (ECI) can capture this ‘resilience dimension’ of complexeconomies and assesses their contribution to sustainable change through the amalgamation of exportand import information. This novel methodological approach incorporates import information byapplying amalgamation on a pre S-Level, which is based on the Lie-Trotter methodology, inducinga Random Walk on a Graph. In the empirical part, this procedure is examined. It shows that theECI ranking may not always reflect the underlying internal economic complexity of a country, andwith it, the country’s resilience and contribution to sustainable change. The novel approach is tosome extent comparable with the degree of eligibility criteria of the original ECI and consistent withthe organic evolutionary character of complex economies. After translating the ECI framework intoits stochastic counterpart, the proofs of its interpretation in statistic and probabilistic terms, and itsrelationship to the Shannon Entropy are conducted. Coherency conditions of sustainability as furthereligibility criteria are formulated and the degree of coherency of the ECI is investigated. In view ofthe challenges related to data preparation, we suggest applying the approach to a broader set of dataincluding import information in order to gain additional insights in a country’s internal economiccomplexity and resilience.Keywords: amalgamation of export with import; coherency conditions; economic complexity; eco-nomic performance equivalent; eligibility; internal economic complexity; lie-trotter approach; nor-malization; random walk on a graph; Shannon entropy; sustainability1. IntroductionThe Economic Complexity framework was developed by César Hidalgo and RicardoHausmann to measure the accumulated productive knowhow of a country and to deducefrom it its future growth prospects [1]. It is based on the assumption that the extent anddiversity of human capabilities in a country can be inferred from export data taking intoaccount the diverse range of exported products (diversification) and how broadly they aresupplied into world markets (which is expressed by a function of ubiquity) by variouscountries. In this context, a product is a carrier of information that signals the existence ofthe requisite capabilities of a country. The focus on the diversification and ubiquity of aproduct gives insights about the product range and the capabilities in a country, withoutmaking any assumptions regarding the nature of these capabilities [1].Relying primarily on published national export data, Hidalgo and Hausmann [1]constructed the so-called Economic Complexity Index (ECI) on which the Atlas of EconomicComplexity is based upon [2]. Compared to the Heckscher–Ohlin model in neoclassicalSustainability 2021, 13, 2049. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042049 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainabilitySustainability 2021, 13, 2049 2 of 16economics (including the subsequent more elaborated models that build on it) that relieson a country’s factor endowment (labor/capital) to predict its competitive advantage ininternational trade [3], the ECI represents a major step forward by not just looking at thequantity but also the diversity of exports and ubiquity of the exported products [1].However, in what sense is the ECI not just related to long-term economic growth, butalso to more inclusive and sustainable change? In this paper, we hypothesize that thisquestion can be answered to some extent through a better understanding of the internalcomplexity of an economy, and its capacity to respond to external shocks through swiftshifts in the economy.2. Literature ReviewA high degree of internal complexity in an economy is characterized by a large numberof specialized firms that operate in networks that contain a large amount of knowledgeand knowhow [4]. They have persisted for a long time in tandem with the larger economicecosystem containing a complementary mix of large, export-oriented firms and resilientdomestic companies combined with supportive not-for-profit organizations and publicsector institutions, including responsive education and research systems [5]. The agile andinnovative companies within this ecosystem that are mostly suppliers of larger export-oriented firms observe trends abroad and then identify a growing dependence on particularimports with no viable counterparts in the domestic economy. They seize the opportunityby making use of their knowledge base, network, and experience to create a domesticproduct that matches the quality and price of the imported product and then graduallyimprove it [6–8]. The product may then reach a stage in which it even becomes attractive tobe exported, be it due to its superiority in quality, its resource efficiency, or other positiveside effects for society and the environment (e.g., produced with less harmful substancesunder better working conditions) [5].The firms that produce such products may not yet appear in official export statisticsbecause they are still in the stage of capturing the opportunities in the domestic market first.However, they increase the long-term competitiveness of the country by creating value-added products that may meet a growing demand abroad as well because they are not justsuperior in quality but also in terms of sustainability. However, since they operate in abusiness environment that is characterized by a high content of knowledge and knowhow,human capital may become increasingly scarce and expensive. As a result, new actorsin the economic ecosystem emerge to address this scarcity by developing technologies(e.g., robotics) [9] and services (i.e., job matchmaking services) [10] that help lower thesearch costs for recruiting talent. This then allows to generate higher returns through theadoption and creation of innovation to make up for the high variable costs of labor. Theyare also more versatile in the sense that they need to respond quickly to new opportunitiesby customizing their business. This often leads to innovation designed to improve thesatisfaction of customers, which then turns out to be of interest to other customers in othermarket segments [5].Another advantage of a domestic economy containing a large network of agile smallerfirms that cater to the domestic as well as the export-oriented industry is the resultingfavorable business environment for the creation of new firms. After all, it is not just afavorable institutional environment and a good public education system that help to lowerthe costs of doing business. Even more crucial are the availability, timely delivery andquality of existing goods and services, as well as the human capital; all produced primarilyfor and by the domestic economy. A new firm is much more likely to succeed in a countrythat has such responsive domestic markets and business services [5].This favorable business environment is non-tradeable by its very nature and reliesto a great extent on social capital that provides the glue that enables firms as well asnetworks of firms to hold and continuously update knowledge and knowhow [11]. Allthese aspects combined increase the capacity to replace economically relevant imports, toSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 3 of 16diversify exports, and to strengthen the overall quality and sustainability of the resultingvalue-added products.The idea to measure internal complexity of countries is not new. There have beencase studies that extended the concept of economic complexity to internal complexitywithin a country (see e.g., [7,8]). The results show that using the complexity frameworkwithin a country gives important and additional insight about the ability to innovate ina particular domestic industry. Interesting findings of the study conducted by Brummittet al. [12] show that for the sustainable improvement of an economy, it might be moreadvisable to have a reliable and gradual increase in technological complexity compared toa premature jump supported by “big push” policies; a finding that may play a relevant rolefor emerging economies and provide an additional argument to look at the importance ofthe internal complexity of an economy, in order to have a more qualified view about thefuture competitiveness and resilience of a country.3. Amalgamation Based on the Lie-Trotter Approach to Capture Complexity in aHolistic WayThe comparability of countries based on different internal data sources and standardsin different countries remains a challenging issue. This makes a holistic comparable com-plexity ranking, including the internal complexity, difficult. However, due to a country’simport mix as supplementary information to export data, we can gain significant insightsabout the country’s economy. Namely, we get to know the products that are required inproduction as well as in consumption. It is obvious that products that are not importedmust be produced internally. This provides important additional insights about a country’sknowhow that is directly related to its internal economy. We suggest closing this gap byamalgamation that is based on the Lie-Trotter approach on a pre S-Level (see e.g., originalpaper of Trotter [13] or [14]) of global import information with export information. Thismerging method offers the possibility for a holistic complexity ranking and accounts forthe internal complexity of the economy with respect to the organic evolution thereof.4. Main Argument and HypothesisIn this paper, we argue that the ECI is not just related to long-term economic growth.However, we also argue that this framework has also a potential to capture the sustainablechange and resilience of countries with regard to their ability to mitigate large shocks. Inthis context, we propose a novel method to better understand how the internal complexityof an economy and its capacity to respond to external shocks through innovative shifts inthe economy may improve its resilience and lead to products with more positive externaleffects for society and the environment.To achieve this, we suggest the amalgamation of export with import data on a pre S-Level. This would improve the understanding of the economic complexity as a systematicdriver of sustainability. At the same time, it would allow to incorporate the internaleconomic complexity of a country into a comparative assessment and respect the organicevolutionary character of an economy.5. Methodological ApproachIn order to be sure that our suggestion fits into a solid theoretical fundament, at thebeginning we had to understand the mechanics of the ECI, which are based on the secondeigenvector e2 (eigenvector associated to second largest eigenvalue in absolute value).For that purpose, we first established the theoretical groundwork with the aim to ensuretractability of our suggestion which we summarize as follows: We first embed the ECIframework into its stochastic counterpart in Section 7.1. Afterwards, in Section 7.2, weinterpret the ECI ranking from a statistical, probabilistic, and an information theoreticalpoint of view. For the rigorous mathematical treatment of the mentioned interpretations,we refer to Lemmas 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, and 4.5 in the supplementary material. Knowing that theShannon Entropy represents the expected amount of information transported by identifyingthe outcome of a random trial on the one hand, and that there exists a certain relationshipsSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 4 of 16between Shannon Entropy and Kolmogorov Complexity (see comments at the end of SectionS4 in the supplementary manuscript based on Theorem 148 in [15]) on the other hand,taken together with our finding for the relationship of the ECI with the Shannon Entropy,this underlines the notion of complexity in the ECI ranking in a certain sense.Our main results are summarized in Section 8, which is organized as follows: Tounderstand the ECI as a systematic driver of sustainability ranking, we first introducecoherency conditions and summarize the behavior of the ECI as well as alternative rankingswith respect to coherency conditions in a standalone (before amalgamation) as well as inamalgamated cases in Section 8.1. The details of the mathematical treatment can be found inSection S5 of the supplementary materials. Roughly speaking, coherency conditions reflectthe expected properties of the complexity ranking as a systematic driver of 
sustainability,which is an additional quality check that is also related to the predictive power of e2. InSection S5 of the supplementary material, these investigations are mainly based on theprototype information matrices. However, we also introduce a lemma, which ensures thatif the products of the countries are well ordered with respect to the inclusion relation, thene2 behaves coherently (see Lemma 5.1 in the supplementary material).In Section 8.2, we introduce our suggestion of the pre S-Level amalgamation first asa limited process, which intuitively indicates that it is an organic merging methodologyfollowed by a simple formula for computation. The details and mathematical treatmentsof Section 8.2 can be found in Section S6 of the supplementary material. In Section 9of this paper, we discuss how our main findings close a relevant research gap. Namely,the incorporation of information about the internal complexity of countries in the ECIframework by means of amalgamation of import with export information on a pre S-Level. This fascinating area offers interesting research ideas, some of which are discussedin Section 10, outlook. Section 11 provides concluding remarks, which mainly relate toaspects like the eligibility conditions and their tradeoffs, which we managed to take intoaccount to a certain degree.6. Empirical Validation Which Motivates the Suggested ApproachIn this section, we discuss the need to merge supplementary information such asimport data with export information. Thereby, we scrutinize key economic sustainabilityindicators of selected countries and demonstrate that the ECI ranking not always reflectsthe underlying internal economic complexity of a country and raises questions as to thenecessity for enhancement.Inspired by the matrix operations governing the dynamics of commutative systems,we used the so-called Lie-Trotter product formula, which we think is also appropriate fornon-commutative interacting systems with an organic evolutionary character. Accordingto our analyses, the amalgamated process seems to “favor” a balanced import (complex-ity)/export (complexity) ratio. Keeping this in mind, we have selected countries that wethink have a too low ECI ranking from a sustainability point of view when the ECI isbased on export data only; and where we think that enhancing the ECI by amalgamationof export and import data might add additional insight and improve the quality of the ECIranking when taking sustainability into account.With the aim to account for the different degrees of internal complexity, we comparein this section the economies of New Zealand and Singapore, among others. While NewZealand represents a country that makes use of the global knowledge economy to developand eventually export value-added agricultural products and has a low ECI ranking,Singapore is a global trading hub for many different products and services with a highECI ranking. By means of these two countries, we intend to demonstrate that the apparentgap in the ECI ranking between the two countries could be closed by taking into accountthe actual degree of internal complexity by means of amalgamation of export with importdata.Tables 1 and 2 display key indicators of selected countries that have on the one handvery high and on the other hand relatively low ECI rankings. Table 1 illustrates thatSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 5 of 16independent of the ECI ranking, the selected countries show similar per capita valuesregarding imports and exports of goods and services and gross value added (GVA).Table 1. Comparison of imports, exports, and gross value added per capita among high and relatively low EconomicComplexity Index (ECI) performing countries.CountryECI Rank (Average2014–2018) 1Import of Goods andServices (Constant2010 US$) Per Capita 2Export of Goods andServices (Constant2010 US$) Per Capita 2Gross Value Added at BasicPrices (GVA) (Constant 2010US$) Per Capita 2New Zealand 52 12,084 11,409 34,504Australia 88 12,459 12,962 52,508Canada 38 16,435 16,199 48,049Japan 1 7764 8067 33,584Switzerland 2 44,516 55,314 54,715Germany 3 20,269 23,110 28,875Singapore 6 96,558 113,763 40,049South Korea 4 13,387 14,317 15,244Sources: 1 Atlas of Economic Complexity [16]; 2 calculated from World Bank Development Indicators [17].Table 2. Comparison of GDP, unemployment, and wealth among high and relatively low ECI performing countries.CountryECI Rank (Average2014–2018) 1GDP Per Capita, PPP(Current International$), Average 2015–2019 2Unemployment, Total (% ofTotal Labor Force)(Modeled ILO Estimate),Average 2015–2019 2Median Wealth 2019(US$ Per Adult) 3New Zealand 52 41,155 4.7 116,437Australia 88 49,378 5.6 181,361Canada 38 48,241 6.3 107,004Japan 1 41,159 2.8 110,408Switzerland 2 67,429 4.8 227,891Germany 3 52,353 3.8 35,313Singapore 6 94,545 4.0 96,967South Korea 4 40,728 3.8 72,198Sources: 1 Atlas of Economic Complexity [16]; 2 World Bank Development Indicators [17]; 3 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook 2019 [18].Table 2 further demonstrates that the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita is simi-lar among countries with high and relatively low ECI rankings. The unemployment rate intwo of the countries with lower ECI ranking is higher than the rest, but not substantially.Median wealth per adult is on average even higher in countries with lower ECI rankingthan in the high ECI ranking countries.On the basis of the key economic indicators of countries in Tables 1 and 2 we candetermine e.g., the average GDP per capita in percent of import of these two classes ofcountries (which is about 340% for New Zealand, Australia, and Canada on average,compared to about 200% for Japan, Switzerland, Germany, South Korea, or Singapore,on average). Based on this, we cannot explain why the ECI ranking of New Zealand,Australia, and Canada is that far off from the top ECI ranking countries Japan, Switzerland,Germany, South Korea, or Singapore. For example, a closer look at New Zealand’s exportand import mix suggests that the country has found a sustainable balance in transformingthe strength gained from export of agricultural products into an internal economy that canbe justified by its comparably low unemployment rate and GDP per capita. As a championof some agricultural export products, New Zealand seems to own unique knowhow that issupplemented by its natural resources. The country optimizes its economic options withefficient technological support through balanced imports, and the latter gives it the abilityto manage extreme economic crises.On the other hand, by looking only at the unemployment rate and GVA per capitaof Singapore, we cannot reject the idea that Singapore’s economic sustainability rankingSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 6 of 16should be lower than its ECI ranking. On the other hand, when considering the averageGDP per capita for the top ranked countries in percent of their imports, which is about200%, we notice that the average for Singapore is significantly lower with less than 100%.Singapore seems to be a special case compared to the other top ECI ranking countries.Based on these facts, one might think that Singapore is a counterexample to our hypothesis.However, the question is, “what is the origin of this strength”? Is it the accumulation ofproductive knowhow within the country or is it its trading skills or other conditions? Thestrength of Singapore most probably is related to the country’s ability to crate favorableeconomic framework conditions and its interconnectedness and is therefore different fromthe accumulated productive knowhow. In fact, the very large network of free trade agree-ments (FTA) gives Singapore widespread access to international markets at preferentialconditions. Although at this stage we are not in a position to question the sustainabilityof Singapore, we observe that the import content of exports of Singapore is in the top 10according to OECD data. This indicates to a certain extent that the accumulated productiveknowhow of Singapore is different from the top five ECI countries. Therefore, in the caseof Singapore, we rather argue that amalgamation of import data might slightly downgradethe ECI of Singapore. However, FTAs as an additional supplementary information couldslightly upgrade it if it is merged. This could rather lead to a different interpretation than“accumulated knowhow” of ECI.As a summary of above observations, New Zeeland on the one hand and Singaporeon the other hand, we can conclude that amalgamation of import information to the ECIframework has a good chance to increase its quality as an indicator for measurement ofthe accumulated productive know how. New Zealand supports the hypotheses that somecountries could be upgraded in the ECI ranking if taking imports into account. Of course,the updated (export and import data) ECI ranking can be merged further with additionalnetwork information such as the number of FTAs for a more complete measurement ofeconomic sustainability. This would be a different message than what we understand underthe current ECI ranking. In this sense, Singapore does not represent a counterexample toour hypothesis.7. Interpreting the Building Blocks of the ECI in Stochastic TermsOur main goal is to suggest a model that can merge supplementary informationsources, which develop organically. Therefore, it makes sense to interpret the buildingblocks of the ECI in stochastic terms. We proceed as follows: First, the method of reflectionhas to be embedded in matrix language followed by its stochastic counterpart; second,the second eigenvector e2 has to be interpreted in statistic, probabilistic, and informationtheoretical terms, and the relationship of e2 with the Shannon Entropy has to be confirmed;third, a framework has to be established for the engineering of the matrix S and an economicperformance equivalent (EPE) has to be introduced as a version of import to export so thatthey are compatible in order to perform the amalgamation operation; fourth, the coherencyconditions of ranking with respect to sustainability have to be established in order to assessthe quality of our suggestion.A main finding is that the Random Walk on a Graph generated by amalgamation ofexport with import information on pre S-Level by means of the Lie-Trotter formula has thedesired properties. For the quality of our suggestion, we conducted the following steps:First, we confirmed the symmetry and positivity of the amalgamated matrix S; second, weformulated conditions of coherency and of a sustainability index; third, we investigated thecoherency behavior of the second eigenvector e2 in the standalone case and compared itwith a Random Walk on a Graph based on amalgamation of export with import informationon a pre S level. The mathematical treatments as well as the numerical analyses in theabove-described procedure can be found in the manuscript, which is provided in thesupplementary materials.Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049 7 of 167.1. Embedding the Method of Reflection in Matrix Language and Its Stochastic CounterpartIn general, given a trade information matrix (export or import) Y of a closed systemof countries, we can construct a symmetric matrix S weighting the “connectivity” of thecountries. An important example of this process was introduced by Hidalgo at al. wherethey introduced zero one matrix information by putting Y(i, j) = M(i, j)= 1 if country iexports the product j and zero otherwise [1]. Based on M, two kind of weights with respectto countries resp. products can be constructed:SC = M × D1 × Mtr (1)SP = Mtr× D2 × M (2)here, D1 and D2 are diagonal matrices. Their diagonal elements are defined by:D1(j, j) =1number o f countries exporting j(3)andD2(i, i) =1number o f products exported by i(4)which are the reciprocal of ubiquity of exported products and the diversity of the countries,respectively. Due to analogy, in the rest of this paper we only focus on SC and write S inorder to avoid notational overflow.The element of matrix S(i, i) of S can be interpreted as expected common knowledgeshared by i and i (see supplementary material Section S3.4 for more insight). The nor-malization of its rows delivers transition probability matrix P governing the associatedRandom Walk on a Graph:P = D × S (5)If we denote the paths of a Random Walk on a Graph with an initial distribution µwith ωµt , we can define a stochastic process Xµt with paths X(ωµt ) for any bet (or payofffunction) X defined on the static state space of the Random Walk (which can be identifiedby the initial knowhow state of the countries).7.2. Interpretations of e2The propagator P can be used to determine the expected payoff of Xit with an initialstate i:u(t) = Pt × X (6)The elements u(t)i: of the time dependent column vector u(t)i result exactly in theexpected payoff of the process Xit, which reads as expected payoff of Xt given the initialstate i: Under mild assumptions, excluding the degenerate cases (a) non-zero contributionof e2 in eigenvector decomposition of X and (b) the strict dominance of second eigenvaluee2 comparing to other eigenvalues excepts, of course the first eigenvalue, we can prove thefollowing statements:Lemma 1. There exist a to so that R(u(t)) = R(e2) for all t > t0 with an adequate choice of signfor e2.Here, R is the ranking function defined on the set of all elements in Rm, which havepairwise different components.Lemma 2. There exist a to > 0 so that the rank of the transition probabilities of switching from onesimilarity class two others at a future time t is given by the rank of e2 for all t > t0.Intuitively, Lemma 2 can be interpreted as: “better” ones in a “superior” class and“worse” ones in an “inferior” class are likely to stay longer in their class. In this context,Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049 8 of 16we assume two similar classes that are defined by the sign of the components of e2. Thefirst statement (Lemma 1) together with the special properties of logarithm imply thenext statement from an information theoretical point of view and justifies the notionof “complexity”.Lemma 3. If we exclude “pathological” cases, then there exist a to so that the rank of the ShannonEntropy of the conditional probabilities Pt(i, .) is given by the rank of e2 for all t > t0 if the sign isadequately chosen.Here, the Shannon Entropy (see [19] for further readings on Shannon Entropy) of theconditional probabilities Pt(i, .) is defined byFinally, with the average of the terms H(s, .) for s ≤ t we gain another alternative:AH(t, i) =∑s≤t H(s, .)t(7)Lemma 4. There exist a to so that, the rank AH(t, .) is constant for all t > t0.In this sense, our numerical tests support the ranking with AH(t, .) with large enought is a more coherent method with respect to diversity and ubiquity also after the amalga-mation of import information.A rigorous treatment of the above statements can be found in Section S4 of thesupplementary manuscript (see Lemmas 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, and 4.5, respectively). The resultsare general and would work not only for Random Walks on a Graph based on zero oneinformation matrices, but also for other Random Walks on a Graph based on real, valuedinformation matrices.7.3. Engineering of the Weight Matrix S and the Economic Performance Equivalent (EPE)of ImportThere exists a vast amount of literature that suggests improving the ECI based onexport information alone [20]. As far as we can assess, almost all approaches are based onthe ranking of the second eigenvector e2, but with different approaches for the engineeringof S. In order to have certainty that our suggestion of amalgamation of import withexport information adds value to the quality of a complexity and sustainability raking, thefollowing question was relevant for us: Can it be that one of these approaches implicitlycovers our suggestion?We answered this question with a mindset based on generic theoretical weight matrixS, where its elements S(i, i) can be interpreted as expected value of common knowledgeshared by i and i (see Sections S3.3 and S3.4 in the supplementary material). For itsconstruction, we assume three prototype behaviors (indicating the dependency behaviorof the market players) at the micro level, driving the evolution of complexity in order tochallenge the potential of our suggestion.The generic weight matrix S takes the following extreme prototype dependencybehavior of market players into 
account in order to identify common knowledge of thecountries: Absolute independent behavior; absolute dependent behavior; and complementarybehavior of market players. The reality will be between these three extreme prototypes(e.g., convex combinations) on product level and weight of the above prototypes dependamong others on the other trade information driving the fragments of common knowledgebetween the countries. For details we refer to Section S3.4.2 in the supplementary material.Dopfer et al. suggest that an evolutionary agent takes external as well as internalstructures in his engagement of solving problems into account [21]. Our conclusion is thatsupplementary import information adds value to quality in order to describe the evolutionof knowhow. In other words, the estimation of expected common knowledge, which isbased only on export information, leaves out the common knowledge, which can resultSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 9 of 16from the internal economy. However, export together with the supplementary importinformation deliver additional insights about the fragments of common knowledge thatis based on the internal economy. These theoretical considerations are also supported bySection 6 of the empirical context. As a summary, we can say that merging import withexport information is relevant. In Section 4, we answer the question of how the mentionedmerging procedure should be conducted in an eligible manner that reflects the organiccharacter of an economy.8. Analysis8.1. Coherency of e2 as Sustainability Ranking and Other AlternativesThe statistic, probabilistic, and information theoretical properties of e2 are appealingand indicate similarities with respect to complexity except in some rare cases. However,these properties do not answer its relationship with sustainability. Our coherency investiga-tion (with respect to sustainability) gives an acceptable answer to this question. Namely, e2behaves logical (minimal requirements) and accepts some “pathological” cases. However,this happens only to a certain extent with respect to common sense sustainability conditions,and does not fully satisfy the following natural conditions in terms of sensitivities:(1) If we only increase the diversity of a specific country i without an expense (e.g.,discovering a side product without an expense), then i should not have less favorableranking then before comparing individually any other country.(2) Decrease the ubiquity of a product of the country i by means of waiving the sameproduct by another country, then i should not have less favorable ranking.Of course, one can disagree with the above statements as general condition due tospecial cases in practice, where even a proven causal relationship justifies the opposite.However, we rather think that the justification of this kind of causal relationship provingthe opposite of above conditions need an additional information source and a metric basedon only export data is rather incapable of delivering an insight on this level.In the context of the present paper, economic sustainability must be related by def-inition to the ability to survive or coexist as a unit (countries, cities) in the long run. Inother words, a country’s sustainability must be understood as ‘future ability’ ensured bya domestic economic ecosystem that is not just competitive in the classic sense of price-competitiveness but through its ability to respond to social and environmental challengeswith scalable and therefore commercially viable innovation. Therefore, we believe sustain-ability management is in a sense a more difficult risk management, because it is not justfocused on preventing risks, but also seizes opportunities.As good news, we note that in case of full comparability of the countries (for any pairof two countries, one of them in the pair has all the products of other country) we have nosurprise: With an adequate choice of the sign of e2, given comparability of product ranges,the countries with a larger product range dominate the ones with a smaller product range.We have also investigated other alternatives with respect to sustainability conditions. e.g.,the diagonal of weight matrix S seems to behave well and also after amalgamation doesnot induce surprises. Although seemingly natural, rigorous treatment of this finding istricky (see Lemma 5.1 in the supplementary material).As a summary, we conclude that e2 is an adequate complexity ranking instrumentexcept in some “rare” cases and behaves after amalgamation as good as before amalga-mation. However, for a leading economic sustainability index, which also behaves wellafter amalgamation of supplementary information, a comprehensive investigation couldbe useful. The diagonal of the weight matrix S is one alternative, which, however, does nothave the mentioned elegant interpretations.8.2. Main Result: Definition and Interpretation of Amalgamation of Random Walks on P-Level aswell as on Pre S-LevelAssume that we have a Random Walk on a Graph that is governed by a transitionprobability matrix Pex and Pim, which is generated by export and information, respectively.Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049 10 of 16A natural idea would be to mix both matrices by their product Pex ∗ Pim inducing a timeinhomogeneous periodic process. However, this idea has its drawback and if Pex and Pimare not commutative, the stationary of the mixture as well as its second eigenvector e2depend on the order of multiplication. However, if we define a matrix operation to beinfinite decimally (which can be interpreted as an organic mixture) and power it accordingly,the matrix operation becomes commutative: PutPex,im,n = P1nex × P1nim (8)and definePex,im := Lim Pnex,im,n (9)The matrix operation above refers to Lie-Trotter product formula, which we call amal-gamation on a P-Level in our context. However, although we have satisfactory numericalresults, we cannot claim that it is always a Random Walk on Graph with positive eigenval-ues. However, the same idea works on pre S-level.PutSex,im,n = S1nex × S1nim (10)and defineSex,im := Lim Snex,im,n (11)The Sex,im defined as above is symmetric, has a positive eigenvalue, and its normal-ization delivers a Random Walk on a Graph under mild conditions. We call this RandomWalk as amalgamated Random Walk on pre S-level (see [10,11] for the details of theoreticaltreatment of Lie-Trotter product). Our numerical results show that Sex,im as well as theamalgamated Random Walk behave well and have balancing properties, which means thata country with a superior import profile is likely to be upgraded.Under mild conditions the above limes exist and can be written as:Sex,im = Exp[log(Sex) + log(Sim)] (12)where Exp(A) and log(A) are exponential and the logarithm function of matrix A respec-tively if they exist (which exists under mild assumptions, see [22] for details). Please notethat the above Formula (13) coincides with the usual matrix product if Sex and Sim arecommutative.Let us give some more insight about this merging approach by illustrating the in-teraction process supporting the organic evolution of the productive knowhow with thefollowing Figure 1.On a micro level, the knowhow evolution of each producer (or market player) willbe impacted by domestic and non-domestic interactions. These interactions happen on adiscrete time points and the evolution of the knowhow of the individual producer mightvery well depend on the order of its interaction with external and internal environment.However, on an aggregated macro level for large enough sample (e.g., producer of acountry) it makes sense to assume that these interactions happen continuously. At leastlocally, this gives rise to assume that up to a time scaling factor, S tex and Stim representsevolution of expected values of common knowledge shared by i and i, based on the exportand economic performance equivalent of import information matrices at time t, respectively.For the economic performance equivalent of import information, we refer to Section S3.4.3of supplementary material, which is closely related to internal demand. The evolutionmatrices S tex and Stim solve meaningful differential growth equations and indicate in somesense exponential information growth. Under these assumptions, as in Figure 1, we cancombine the evolution Stex with Stim in an interval of length 2/n by a successive applicationof the nth root of Sex and Sim:Sex,im,n (i, ı̃) = S1nex × S1nim(i, ı̃) (13)Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049 11 of 16By taking the nth power of Sex,im,n (i, ı̃), we obtain a discrete process that dependson the order of the matrix multiplication in (14). However, for large n the mentioneddependence on the order becomes marginal. Finally, taking the above procedure to limitleads to the mentioned formula for amalgamation of Stex with Stim:Sex,im = Lim Snex,im,n= Exp[log(Sex) + log(Sim)](14)𝑆  𝑆𝑖 𝚤̃ 𝑡𝑆  𝑆 𝑆 𝑆𝑆 𝑆𝑆 , ,  (𝑖, 𝚤̃) = 𝑆 × 𝑆 (𝑖, 𝚤̃)𝑆 , ,  (𝑖, 𝚤̃), 𝑛𝑆 𝑆𝑆 ,  =  𝑆 , ,                  = Exp[log(𝑆 ) + log(𝑆 ) 𝑒  𝐻(𝑡, . ) AH(𝑡, . )Figure 1. Organic evolution of productive knowhow.8.3. Model Risk and Numerical ValidationOne way to compensate the lack of data and to minimize the model risk is to investi-gate its behavior on prototype examples on predefined eligibility criteria and to compare itwith different models. In this sense, we examine the degree of eligibility of the introducedstandards for e2, H(t, .), and AH(t, .) and compare it with the diagonal elements of theamalgamated Sex, im, which is eligible with respect to the coherency conditions diversity,ubiquity, and monotony. Table 3 summarizes our numerical tests.Table 3. Summary results of the numerical tests and theoretical coherency implications.Ranking MethodCoherency Criteria(before Amalgamation)Consistency with Respect toEquivalent ClassesDiversity & Ubiquity Monotonye2On prototype examples notsatisfiedTo some degree, on someprototype examples not satisfiedSatisfied by the monotony Lemma5.1 in supplementary materialsH(t, .)Satisfied also on prototypeexamplesAnalogous to e2 Analogous to e2AH(t, .) Analogous to H(t, .) To a large extent satisfied Analogous to e2Diagonal of S Analogous to H(t, .) To a larger extent satisfied Analogous to e2In some “pathological” cases, countries can be segregated into two classes, where eachelement of one class has a counterpart in the other class. In such cases, the absolute valueSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 12 of 16of the components of e2 is coherent. However, then H(t, .) adapts its ranking according tothe absolute value of the components e2 for large enough t automatically.With the term “monotony” in Table 3, we mean the following condition: If productsets of the countries can be ordered totally with respect to inclusion relations (which meansthat country 1 has all the exported products of country 2, country 2 has all the exportedproducts of country 3, country 3 has all the exported products of country 4 . . . and so on)then we expect that any eligible ranking system orders the countries accordingly, whichmeans that the rank of country 1 should be more favorable than rank of country 2, rank ofcountry 2 should be more favorable than rank of country 3 and so on. In this sense, all theabove alternatives behave coherently (see Lemmas 5.1, 5.2 and remark 1 in supplementarymaterial). Moreover, if we use the notation ≤C for comparing the degree of coherencybetween ranking methods, we can summarize our theoretical and numerical investigationsas follows:e2 ≤C H(t, .) for large enough t≤C AH(t, .) for large enough t≤C Diagonal of S.(15)We would like to emphasize that due to the Entropy Lemma 3 in Section 7.2 e2 andH(t, .) for large t are up to some special cases equivalent, which could also be confirmednumerically. The ranking methods e2, H(t, .), AH(t, .) and the diagonal elements of theamalgamated Sex, im behave similarly to a certain extent. However, we are also interested inthe balancing impact of amalgamation which is the compensation effect of strong internaleconomy (given by economic performance equivalent import information matrix). Table 4summarizes our theoretical and numerical work.Table 4. Balancing behavior of ranking methods after amalgamation.Ranking Method Balancing Behaviore2 Not satisfied on some prototype examplesH(t, .) Up to special prototypes cases analogous to e2AH(t, .) To a large extent satisfiedDiagonal of S To a larger extent satisfiedAccording to our analysis, amalgamation of import with export information has abalancing effect in descending order in the above table. In the amalgamated case, we cangive an additional porotype example consisting of monotone decreasing and monotoneincreasing information matrices, which induces two classes of countries, where eachelement of one class has an equivalent counterpart in the other class. Similar to thecase before amalgamation, also in the case of amalgamation the absolute value of thecomponents of e2 is coherent and H(t, .) adapts its ranking according to the absolute valueof the components e2 for large enough t automatically.Finally, we would like to note that we also conducted simulations of rankings in orderto measure the correlations of above ranking methods. It turns out that the correlation oftwo methods is driven by the degree of coherencies, which is not surprising. For exampleCorr(R(diagonal of S), R(e2))≤ Corr(R(diagonal of S), R(H(t, .))≤ Corr(R(diagonal of S), R(AH(t, .))(16)In the above expression R(H(t, .)) and R(AH(t, .)) means ranking by H(t, .)) andAH(t, .) for by means of large enough t. More insight about above summaries can be foundin Section S5 of the supplementary material.9. DiscussionIdeally, we would need all the relevant value chain information from the origin tothe end for the ranking of accumulated productive knowhow as a significant driver ofSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 13 of 16economic sustainability. Even though that does not seem to be a realistic requirement,the assumption serves as a good start with a learning instrument that ranks sustainabilityin a holistic way. After all, a measurement framework that can learn coherently throughthe incorporation of supplementary value chain information will be able to continuouslyimprove the quality of output and therefore become more valid over time. We believethat this goal can be achieved in a pragmatic and modular way with our suggestion ofamalgamation of import with export information. In this sense, we could give an alternativeanswer to the following three questions:(1) Is it necessary to enrich the ECI with supplementary value chain information such asimport trade data?(2) How can we merge supplementary information to improve the quality of the rankingsystem and avoid non-intended massages and false interpretation as much as possi-ble?(3) What is the expected contribution of the suggested enhancement?In this paper, we answer the above questions as follows:Answer to first question: The empirical validation presented in Section 6 supports therelevancy of supplementary value chain information such as import trade data in order toimprove the quality of the ECI.Answer to the second question: We argue that the amalgamation of import data onthe S-level is an adequate approach to close the gap related to the first question. Theintuition behind our approach is the imitation of the behavior of market players. The latteris influenced by external as well as internal environments, which successively drive thedynamics of market players in infinite decimal time periods. In this way, we are in linewith the organic evolution of the economy, governed by two dynamics (a Random Walkon a Graph induced by amalgamation of two weight matrices Sex, Sim of a graph bothresulting from evolutionary processes, see Sections S3.3 and S3.4 of supplementary material)generated by two supplementary information matrices. Our suggestions also satisfythe desired mathematical properties allowing statistical, probabilistic, and informationtheoretical interpretations. Moreover, we have conducted numerical analysis in order totest the coherency behavior of amalgamation indicating e.g., the preference of balancingof export with import data. Although we could not test our suggestion with real worlddata, the above work supports our hypothesis that our suggested approach can improvethe quality of the ECI as a systematic driver 
of sustainability. We would also like to notethat the balancing impact of our suggested approach depends on the ranking method.For example, the ranking by the Shannon Entropy (which is almost equivalent version ofranking method of ECI indicated by Lemma 3 of Section 7.2) would result in a slightly moresensitive balancing impact than the ranking metrics of ECI. This implies that a favorableeconomic performance equivalent of the import information matrix compensates for a poorexport product profile in our suggested amalgamation approach in a more sensitive way.The details of our methodology, and the conducted numerical analysis, can be found in thesupplementary material.Answer to the third question: We argue that the amalgamation of import data assupplementary value chain information to export data gives insight also into the internalcomplexity of an economy. It opens the possibility to construct a comparable internal com-plexity of the countries based on global export and import data. However, this additionaloutput requires further engineering (see Section 10, outlook).10. OutlookDuring our research, we had intensive discussions that were of theoretical and practi-cal nature and our investigations became much more comprehensive as we had plannedfor at the beginning. According to our literature research, we could not find self-containedgroundwork with which we could connect the theoretical quality of our main suggestionamalgamation of import the information with the export information on a pre S-Level.However, also due to obvious data challenges, we were not able to conduct comprehensiveSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 14 of 16empirical tests. Luckily, our team was a mixture of persons with complementary skills,which was exactly what was needed in order to close these gaps. Our supplementarymaterial is a mixture of theoretical and numerical treatments, which summarizes theworkarounds in a self-contained manner for our purposes. At this point, we present theweak points of our findings, how they could be developed further, and how our workcould contribute to other interdisciplinary areas. The following aspects we consider themost interesting:• Coherency conditions of sustainability: During our research for this paper, we felt astrong necessity to formulate coherency conditions of sustainability, because a broadconsensus for its specification is required. In this sense, we have suggested a listof coherency conditions reflecting some “natural” expectations from a complexityranking as systematic driver of sustainability in order perform the quality of oursuggestion. One open question for us is: What are the additional coherency conditionsthat would be of interest and how can we make the list free of redundancy? From atheoretical point of view this seems to be very challenging question but might helpto improve the quality of the ECI ranking and contribute to the transparency andcommunication.• Class of coherent ranking measure for complexity and sustainability: We can support the factthat the second eigenvector is to a certain extent an eligible complexity measure due toits relationship with Shannon Entropy and coherent systematic driver of sustainabilityto a certain extend. However, as a systematic driver of sustainability, investigation ofcoherency of further alternatives could be an interesting research area that could haveuseful contribution to theory of economic sustainability.• “Top down” internal complexity and internal sustainability ranking: Our main hypothesisis that the supplementary import trade information and its amalgamation with exportdata gives insight also about the internal economy. The question is: Given the supple-mentary export and import information matrices and their amalgamated version, is itpossible to generate top-down internal complexity ranking as a systematic driver ofinternal sustainability from this ingredient? A positive answer to this question woulddeliver comparable internal ranking of countries.• Empirical test of a sustainability index: In our opinion, resilience is a part of sustainabilitythat refers to the ability to cope with challenging extreme events. Therefore, back-testing of a ranking based on extreme events (e.g.,) is an outlook that we can imagine.In this sense, depending on the availability of data, the back-testing of the quality ofthe amalgamated ECI based on the corona crisis is an interesting outlook.11. Concluding RemarksCountries that achieve economic complexity in a holistic way are well-prepared torespond to external shocks through internal processes that may also impact their futureexport structure and sustainability (in terms of resilience). It helps them to increase not justtheir economic complexity, but also their sustainability, and with it the ability to reconcileeconomic growth with environmental and social concerns. In other words, a country’sfuture is more likely to be secured if its economic activities also contribute to its resilience,which requires an awareness about different possible scenarios and an ability to respondto such scenarios. Farsighted investments in sustainable and scalable innovation as wellas the ability to pursue a plan B to effectively respond to socio-political, environmental,and financial shocks on a global as well as on a local scale contribute substantially to acountry’s resilience, which increases with the growth of economic complexity in a holisticway.A complex and resilient economy is also the product of a successful collaborationbetween different actors largely operating in the domestic economy and the large, globallycompetitive export-oriented firms in the country in jointly responding to external trendsand shocks by also exploiting the new opportunities that emerge from it. This ability tocooperate and with it to hold together the knowledge and knowhow that enables a complexSustainability 2021, 13, 2049 15 of 16economy to respond and enhance its resilience is built on bridging social capital. At thesame time, the ability to create such products enhances the actor’s social capital base andthus opens opportunities for favorable terms in future stakeholder collaboration. In otherwords, the acquisition of social capital through an outstanding performance helps to reducethe costs of maintaining the linkages within the domestic economic networks and makes iteasier to build new ones.This enhances the ability to respond to new regulation and scarcity through scalableinnovation. Firms that operate within these networks are more likely to gain new projectsand market shares, not merely through competition but also cooperation. These hybridand evolving nodes of interactions among units within a particular domestic networkdevelop organically and are firmly embedded in the wider economic system. For that pur-pose, grouping countries in accordance with their degree of resilience based on economiccomplexity information such as import data in addition to the standard global exportinformation will have to be taken into account to a greater degree.Our novel methodological approach applied to a limited but well-selected empiricalinvestigation supports the hypothesis that the amalgamation of supplementary value chaininformation of import and export is of relevance to the improvement of the ECI or otheralternative sustainability rankings. Our interpretation of the results and the coherencycheck supports that the ECI is a valuable measurement instrument for accumulated pro-ductive knowledge to a certain extent. Other ranking methods or even simple diagonalelements of the weighting matrix may offer an alternative as a coherent country ranking ofsustainability, which behave well after amalgamation.Complex methods may yield more concise results but at the expense of practicabilitywhereas simple ones may be more practical but at the expense of the accuracy relatedto statistic and probabilistic interpretations of the empirical results. In summary, we cansay that there is a tradeoff between theoretical perfection and pragmatism. Neverthe-less, we think that comprehensive and deeper analyses of ECI and other alternatives bymeans of consolidated coherency conditions would contribute to deeper understanding ofsustainability engineering and mechanics of future suggestions in this area.Supplementary Materials: The manuscript containing all the mathematical treatments of the modeland the extensive technical material is available online at https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/4/2049/s1.Author Contributions: Conceptualization, B.C. and I.C.; methodology, B.C. and I.C.; data curation,B.C., I.C., and I.S.; validation, I.S., B.C., and I.C.; coding and numerical analysis B.C.; writing—original draft preparation, I.C.; writing—review and editing, I.S., P.A., and B.C. All authors have readand agreed to the published version of the manuscript.Funding: This research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available in “Amalgamation of Ex-port with Import Information: The Economic Complexity Index as a Coherent Driver of Sustainability”.Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Eugenio Paris for his support in programming,numerical analysis and his availability as a sparring partner.Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.References1. Hidalgo, C.A.; Hausmann, R. The building blocks of economic complexity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2009, 106, 10570–10575.[CrossRef] [PubMed]2. Hausmann, R.; Hidalgo, C.A.; Bustos, S.; Coscia, M.; Chung, S.; Jimenez, J.; Simoes, A.; Yıldırım, M.A. The Atlas of EconomicComplexity–Mapping Paths to Prosperity; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014; 368p.3. Deardorff, A.V. The general validity of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem. Am. Econ. Rev. 1982, 72, 683–694.4. Buccellato, T. The Competences of Firms are the Backbone of Economic Complexity. SSRN 2016. [CrossRef]Sustainability 2021, 13, 2049 16 of 165. Aerni, P. Global Business in Local Culture: The Impact of Embedded Multinational Enterprises; Springer Briefs in Economics; Springer:Cham, Switzerland, 2018; 122p.6. Jacobs, J. The Economy of Cities; Random House: New York, NY, USA, 1969; 268p.7. Reynolds, C.; Agrawal, M.; Lee, I.; Zhan, C.; Li, J.; Taylor, P.; Mares, T.; Morison, J.; Angelakis, N.; Roos, G. A sub-nationaleconomic complexity analysis of Australia’s states and territories. Reg. Stud. 2018, 52, 715–726. [CrossRef]8. Chávez, J.C.; Mosqueda, M.T.; Gómez-Zaldívar, M. Economic complexity and regional growth performance: Evidence from theMexican Economy. Rev. Reg. Stud. 2017, 47, 201–219.9. Decker, M.; Fischer, M.; Ott, I. Service Robotics and Human Labor: A first technology assessment of substitution and cooperation.Robot. Auton. Syst. 2017, 87, 348–354. [CrossRef]10. Carrillo-Tudela, C.; Gartner, H.; Kaas, L. Recruitment Policies, Job-Filling Rates and Matching Efficiency; IZA Discussion Paper No.13240; IZA Institute of Labor Economics: Bonn, Germany, 2020; Available online: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3602416 (accessed on 29 January 2021).11. Hidalgo, C. Why Information Grows: The Evolution of Order, from Atoms to Economies; Basic Books: New York, NY, USA, 2015.12. Brummitt, C.D.; Huremović, K.; Pin, P.; Bonds, M.H.; Vega-Redondo, F. Contagious disruptions and complexity traps in economicdevelopment. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2017, 1, 665–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]13. Trotter, H.F. On the product of semi-groups of operators. Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 1959, 10, 545–551. [CrossRef]14. Chernoff, P.R. Product formulas, nonlinear semigroups, and addition of unbounded operators. Mem. Am. Math. Soc. 1974, 140,1–121. [CrossRef]15. Shen, A.; Uspensky, V.A.; Vereshchagin, N. Kolmogorov Complexity and Algorithmic Randomness; American Mathematical Society:Providence, RI, USA, 2017; Volume 220, 511p.16. Atlas of Economic Complexity. Available online: https://atlas.cid.harvard.edu/ (accessed on 29 November 2020).17. World Bank Development Indicators. Available online: https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators(accessed on 29 November 2020).18. Credit Suisse Global Wealth Databook 2019. Available online: https://www.credit-suisse.com/about-us/en/reports-research/global-wealth-report.html (accessed on 29 November 2020).19. Shannon, C.E. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 1948, 27, 623–656. [CrossRef]20. Albeaik, S.; Kaltenberg, M.; Alsaleh, M.; Hidalgo, C.A. 729 new measures of economic complexity (Addendum to Improving theEconomic Complexity Index). arXiv 2017, arXiv:1708.04107.21. Dopfer, K.; Foster, J.; Potts, J. Micro-meso-macro. J. Evol. Econ. 2004, 14, 263–279. [CrossRef]22. Haber, H.E. Notes on the Matrix Exponential and Logarithm; Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, University of California: SantaCruz, CA, USA, 2018; Available online: http://scipp.ucsc.edu/~{}haber/webpage/MatrixExpLog.pdf (accessed on 22 January2021).