Artificial Intelligence for Managing the Complexity of the Socio-Economic Systems towards Horizon 2020 and Agenda 2030

ArcHistoR EXTRA  6 (2019) 
www.archistor.unirc.it
La Mediterranea verso iL 2030
studi e ricerche sul patrimonio storico e sui paesaggi antropici, 
tra conservazione e rigenerazione
a cura di Marina Mistretta,
Bruno Mussari, Adolfo Santini
t h e  M e d i t e r r a n e a  t o w a r d s  2 0 3 0
s t U d i e s  a n d  r e s e a r C h  o n  h i s t o r i C a L  h e r i t a G e  a n d 
a n t h r o P i C  L a n d s C a P e s ,  C o n s e r v at i o n  a n d  r e G e n e r at i o n 
ISSN 2384-8898
ISBN 978-88-85479-08-1Supplemento di ArcHistoR 12/2019 
tiziana Ciano, iside rita Laganà, Bruno antonio Pansera, 
Massimiliano Ferrara
tiziana.ciano@unirc.it, isiderita.lagana@unirc.it, bruno.pansera@unirc.it, 
massimiliano.ferrara@unirc.it
I semi dell’Intelligenza Artificiale (AI) furono piantati da filosofi classici 
che tentarono di descrivere il processo del pensiero umano come la 
manipolazione meccanica dei simboli. L’AI è un’area di informatica 
che enfatizza la creazione di macchine intelligenti che funzionano e 
reagiscono come gli umani. Alcune delle attività che i computer con AI 
possono progettate includono: riconoscimento vocale, apprendimento, 
pianificazione, problem solving e set fuzzy. Negli ultimi 15 anni, Amazon, 
Google e altri hanno sfruttato l’apprendimento automatico per il loro 
enorme vantaggio commerciale. L’apprendimento automatico alla 
base dell’AI è la pratica dell’uso di algoritmi per analizzare i dati al fine 
di fare una determinazione o una previsione su qualche fenomeno. 
La modellazione fuzzy ci aiuta ad affrontare i fenomeni inclusi i 
parametri e le condizioni incerti, ci fornisce strumenti per modellare 
il sistema considerato nel mondo reale e avvicinarci molto più al suo 
comportamento. Il set fuzzy, quindi, rappresneta una classe di oggetti 
con un continuum di gradi di appartenenza. Il quadro sopra descritto ci 
dà un modo naturale di affrontare fenomeni così imprecisi, quando le 
classi di oggetti mancano di criteri precisi di adesione per i loro elementi. Il 
contesto da consideare terreno fertile scientico concerne la gestione della 
complessità dei moderni sistemi antropici socio-economici (Città, Aree 
urbane e il loro sviluppo socio-sostenibile).
Intelligenza artificiale per la gestione della complessità 
dei sistemi socio-economici verso Horizon 2020 
e Agenda 2030
DOI: 10.14633/AHR150
139
t h e  M e d i t e r r a n e a  t o w a r d s  2 0 3 0
s t U d i e s  a n d  r e s e a r C h  o n  h i s t o r i C a L  h e r i t a G e  a n d 
a n t h r o P i C  L a n d s C a P e s ,  C o n s e r v at i o n  a n d  r e G e n e r at i o n 
Artificial Intelligence for Managing the Complexity 
of the Socio-Economic Systems towards Horizon 2020 
and Agenda 2030
tiziana Ciano, iside rita Laganà, Bruno antonio Pansera, Massimiliano Ferrara
The Emergence of AI in the Age of Sustainable Development
Jeffrey Sachs, professor of health policy and management at Columbia University, postulated that 
the world is entering a new Age of Sustainable Development, an epoch in which the nations of the 
world must collaborate and contribute to address the most intractable problems of persistent extreme 
poverty, social exclusion, economic injustice, poor governance, and environmental degradation1. Sachs 
was also a senior advisor to the UN on the SDGs and the Millennium Development Goals and is currently 
the director of the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network (UNSDSN). At the 2002 UN World 
Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, he proposed a framework for analyzing 
sustainable development through the four pillars of economic development, social development, 
environmental protection, and good governance. Each of these four components are independent and 
mutually reinforcing pillars, but they are all essential to sustainable development in the world (World 
Summit of Sustainable Development [WSSD], 2002). Through the UNSDSN, Sachs deﬁned problems on 
sustainable development proposed solutions, and provided reams of data on phenomena related to 
global sustainability. However, AI is such a novel, dynamic and rapidly evolving phenomenon that its 
impacts on the work of advancing the SDGs are just emerging and have yet to be extensively studied.
1. Sachs 2015.
140
Much research has been published about the emergence of artiﬁcial intelligence from its inception 
until the current era. Industry trade magazines and academic journal articles have added to the 
body of research as innovators in various ﬁelds incorporate AI experimentally into theory, thought 
processes, and practical solutions to problems. At ﬁrst, there was an abrupt rise in AI investment, and 
then, after narrow returns investments declined, increased, and declined, in a somewhat consistent 
pattern over AIs history2. AI has been on a roller coaster ride of success and failure.
While some people herald the increase in utilization of AI as a vision of increased economic 
prosperity, improved leisure and free time, others such as Elon Musk, Stephen Hawking, and Bill 
Gates, caution that increases in  AI  utilization  will  exacerbate  global economic inequity and herald 
an existential crisis for humanity3. It could herald a new long wave of 40-60 years in length (called 
the Kondratiev Wave), which portends a new cycle of sustained industrial innovation and economic 
growth. Russian economist Nikolai Kondratiev ﬁrst observed this phenomenon of business cycles 
of booms followed by busts in his 1925 book, The Major Economic Cycles, and Joseph schumpeter 
named these economic cycles Kondratieff waves in his honor4. 
Undoubtedly, AI could be a powerful force that can spark decades of economic growth, which is 
one of the four tenets of sustainable development5.
AI can currently be divided into two types: Narrow Artiﬁcial Intelligence (NAI) and artiﬁcial general 
intelligence (AGI). NAI, which includes all current AI, is considered to be a weaker form of AI. To 
date, AGI remains theoretical but is rapidly becoming feasible as its application proliferates. A subset 
of AGI is Human-Level Machine Intelligence (HLMI), which is idealized as being able to perform as 
effectively as an extremely gifted human in all intellectual tasks6. This is the speciﬁc genre of AI that 
causes fear in some people, since it would not just take jobs in the short term but could also supplant 
humankind as the apex species on the planet in the long-term.
AGI is closer to becoming reality as bio-humanoid roboticists, such as the life-like robots created 
by David Hanson, Ben Goertzel, and other pioneers in the ﬁeld become more commonplace and 
acceptable7. These trail-blazing inventors seek to create a database that would collect the knowledge 
2. Munoz, Naqvi 2018.
3. Sainato 2015. 
4. Barnett 2002.
5. Sachs 2015.
6. Phis.Org 2018.
7. Goralski, Górniak-Kocikowska 2017; Goralski, Górniak-Kocikowska 2018.
Artificial Intelligence
141
of all bio-humanoid robots into one receptacle, OpenCog, that could be instantaneously distributed to 
all bio-humanoid robots. AI knowledge would be cumulative and evenly distributed. While AGI could 
cause widespread displacement of jobs through improved eﬃciencies in production  and  distribution, 
NAI is already causing gross displacement of jobs and disruptions in established professions. One 
example highlighted in an article titled Artificial Intelligence states that “Goldman Sachs employed six 
hundred traders in 2000,  the  corporation  was  able  to  reduce  their number of human traders to 
two by 2017 because of advances in narrow AI”. On the other end of the spectrum, people believe 
that the results of heightened utilization of AI could solve the problems of income inequality, which 
is related to Reduced Inequalities. However, since the results of superior production and eﬃciency 
gains have not been distributed equally in the past, it is unrealistic to believe that those who develop 
and own the next generation of AI technology, would distribute the rewards widely instead of 
narrowly by increasing their own wealth. This could create a concentration of wealth and increase 
the gap between the haves and have-nots.
This unequal distribution of wealth, knowledge, and power would not just exist on an individual 
level but would also be concentrated in speciﬁc countries and cities creating even deeper worldwide 
disparity, once again impeding the achievement of Reduced Inequalities. Work that has previously 
been exclusive to human experience can already be performed better and faster by AI, which not 
only creates a calamitous situation for employment, but also added stress for the human psyche8. 
A majority of workers could be displaced when AGI exceeds the capabilities of the average human 
in various economic roles. In January 2015, Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and dozens of artiﬁcial 
intelligence experts published an open letter calling for research on the societal impacts and 
unintended consequences of AI. The letter acknowledged the potential beneﬁts of AI, but also raised 
the specter of automated weapons and uncontrollable machines escalating armed conﬂicts that may 
lead to human extinction9. Recently, Stanford University launched an institute for Human-Centered 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (HAI) that will bring together experts from various ﬁelds like economics, 
philosophy, ethics, psychology et al.10.
8. See note 7.
9. See note 3.
10. Marconi 2019.
142
 AI and the Water Crisis: the Case of Smart Water Management
“Water is essential for life. For thousands of years, human settlement and advancement has 
been dictated by a reliable supply of clean, safe water. In the face of a ﬁckle supply system, people 
ﬂourished, moved or perished”11. Water and sanitation are at the center of the SDG resource triad. It 
touches on, and impacts, women’s empowerment and gender equality, food and agriculture, energy 
and climate, and infrastructure & technology.
Water is widely used in agriculture, industry, and also in the domestic household. Each day, cities 
and communities around the world work on millions of tons of raw water, processed water and waste 
water to service the needs of human civilization. Water must be adequately treated and transported 
in accordance to hygiene and health standards to ensure its quality and properties will meet the 
speciﬁcations demanded by the end users. In recent years, there is movement to leverage on the 
emerging technologies to offer sustainable solutions for treatment, transportation and the recycling 
and reuse of water.
While the world’s supply of water is more than adequate to meet all current needs and demands, 
the treatment and distribution facilities and networks are not12. There are still many communities 
in the developing world in which the water resources are inadequate to meet household, economic 
development and environmental needs. In such regions, the shortage of potable, clean water to meet 
human drinking water and sanitation needs continues to affect human health and productivity and 
hence economic development, as well as the protection of the environment and natural ecosystems. 
The choices that communities, cities, and nations make regarding the management of water 
resources have great implications on our future welfare. Some have compromised their future security 
or sustainability by disrupting and overusing freshwater supplies, overdrawn groundwater aquifers; 
polluted natural water bodies such as estuaries, coasts and oceans; and degraded ecosystems that 
sustain the food chain. Humanity must leverage the advances in technology and AI innovation to 
enable it to satisfy short-term economic demand and at the same time safeguard the long-term 
environmental sustainability of natural ecosystems and bioregions.
While water sources and water supplies may not have changed substantially over time, the 
management tools available in the ﬁeld have evolved. Water utilities are assisted by smart water 
11. Hill 2018.
12. Cosgrove, Loucks 2015.
Artificial Intelligence
143
management that is powered by AI13. “Progress on new artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) technology could 
make monitoring at water treatment plants cheaper and easier and help safeguard public health”14. 
While the ﬁrst AI-driven software utilized expert systems or rule-based algorithms to decide on 
outputs or to analyze alternatives in a ﬁeld of choices, the newer AI tools replicate the way that 
humans learn in its just-in-time applications.
In the learning phase, the input data is correlated to known outputs to allow the algorithms to 
learn over time. Then, in the “operational phase”, the program begins to make sense of patterns as 
new data is introduced. Because of AI’s ability to constantly adapt and process large amounts of data 
in real-time, it is an ideal tool for managing water resources in an ever-changing environment, and 
the business of water, allowing water utility managers to maximize current revenue and effectively 
plan for the years ahead.
By utilizing these new software-as-service platforms, new dynamic strategic ﬁnancial operations 
can be created and managed for water utilities to signiﬁcantly improve productivity and cost-savings. 
The system also incorporates low-cost sensors and communication networks to track real-time water 
loss and manage distribution networks. “The power of AI unleashes the imagination of our water 
professionals”15. This is an interesting turn of phrase since at this time in the water utility industry, 
the ability of AI to combine growth projections with future water availability and infrastructure 
condition assessment allows managers to maximize decisions and investment in the infrastructure.
However, as with all narrow AI, the system is only as good at the data that is being supplied to it 
and the managerial under- standing of the output that is being produced by the data. And, as with all 
AI, as AI asks the questions and supplies the responses, humans are deprived of some of the insight 
that they previously had access to from ﬁnding solutions to the problems themselves. For now, 
human interpretation is still needed, but as AI becomes more astute and the responses and solutions 
become more prevalent, then human interaction will become less important and the tipping point 
will become more obvious. Ultimately, the goal of AI is not to be perfect, AI simply needs to do better 
than humans16. Despite the transition that may present some diﬃculty and risks, the use of AI in 
water management has the potential to increase productivity, improve water conservation of this 
precious resource and thereby advance the achievement of a number of Global Goals.
13. See note 13 and  O’Connor 2017.
14. Phis.Org 2018. 
15. See note 13.
16. Kaufman 2018.
144
Conclusions
In this paper we present a model of AI for smart water management. All this effort would lead to 
the realization of an important sustainable development, it would create those conditions that would 
lead a decision maker to transfer AI facilities into the Socio-economic systems of the future with 
certain «smart» characteristics and produce a saving in economic terms and above all safeguarding 
those perishable raw materials, applying the Kyoto protocol as widely as possible.
The operating platform was provided by Horizon 2020 which, as an European operational strategy, 
had already  laid the foundations for spreading a culture of sustainability declined in its various facets. 
As regards the concept of Smart city, urban sustainability et similia will ﬁnd a great development 
thanks to the use of the tool of AI. 
With this paper, we wanted to provide a timid but substantial contribution towards the 
identiﬁcation of some of the scientiﬁc features concerning the AI, which naturally ﬂow towards the 
achievement of the objectives identiﬁed with Agenda 2030 through Horizon 2020.
Figure 1. Technology 
and enviromment a 
Joint Combination for 
Sustainability, https://
www.fundacred.org.
br/site/2019/06/26/
conferencia-
internacional-debate-
economia-verde-em-
fortaleza/ (accessed 30 
March 2019).
Artificial Intelligence
145
Bibliography
Agraval, Gans, Goldfarb  2018 - A. Agraval, A. Gans, J. Goldfarb, Prediction machines: the simple economics of artiﬁcial 
intelligence, harvard Business review Press, Boston 2018.
AI-Driven Test System Detects Bacteria in Water. Intel. Retrieved from, https://sofwre.itel.com/enus/aticles/ai-driven-test-
system-detects-bacteria-in- water (accessed 30 March 2019).
Phis.Org 2018 - Phis.Org, Artificial intelligence technology could help protect water supplies, https://phys.org/news/2018-
07-artiﬁcial-intelligence- technology.html (accessed 30 March 2019).
Artificial Intelligence, Opposing viewpoints online collection, Gale, Opposing viewpoints in «context», http://link.galegroup.
com/apps/ doc/PC301099927/OVIC?u=a13qu&sid=OVIC&xid=a6804b12 (accessed 30 March 2019).
Barnett 2002 - V. Barnett, Which was the “real” Kondratiev: 1925 or 1928?, in «Journal of the History of Economic 
thought», 2002, 24/4, pp. 475-478.
Cosgrove, Loucks 2015 - W.J Cosgrove, D.P Loucks, Water management: Current and future challenges and 
research directions. Commentary, in «water resources research», https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
epdf/10.1002/2014WR016869 (accessed 30 March 2019).
Goralsky, Górniak-Kocikowska 2014 - M.A. Goralski, K. Górniak-Kocikowska, A New Frontier in Ethics Education: Robotics, 
paper prensented at the Academy of International Business-Northeast, Chapter special Conference, Tianjin China 2014.
Goralski, Górniak-Kocikowska 2017 - M.A. Goralski, K. Górniak-Kocikowska, Globalization, codiﬁcation, automation, 
and artificial intelligence: Job affectation, Presented at the academy of international business–US–NE conference, temple 
University, Philadelphia 2014.
Goralsky, Górniak-Kocikowska 2018 - M.A. Goralski, K. Górniak-Kocikowka, Permissionless evolution of ethics. Artificial 
Intelligence, in Munoz, Naqvi 2018, pp. 69-78.
Goralski, O’Connor 2018 - M.A Goralski, M. O’Connor, Global Entrepreneurship & Innovation: Artificial Intelligence, 
Open Cog, and Blockchain, Presented at the academy of international Business-Us-ne regional Conference, Global 
Entrepreneurship & Innovation (Drexel University October 19-20 2018), Philadelphia PA 2018.
Hill 2018 - T. Hill, How artiﬁcial intelligence is reshaping the water sector, in «water Finance & Magment», https://waterfm.
com/artiﬁcial- intelligence-reshaping-water-sector/ (accessed 30 March 2019).
Kaufman 2018 - d Kaufman, Watch out workers, algorithms are coming to replace You maybe. (An intview with Israeli 
author and historian Yuval Noah Harari.), in «The New York times», https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/18/business/q-
and-a-yuval-harari.html (accessed 30 March 2019).
Marconi 2019 - F. Marconi, AI pioneer Fei-Fei Li on building benevolent machines, in «wall street Journal», https://www.
wsj.com/articles/ai-pioneer-fei-fei-li-on-building-benevolent-machines-11552906800?mod=searchresults&page=1&p
os=1 (accessed 30 March 2019).
Munoz, Naqvi 2018 -  J.M. Munoz, Al Naqvi (eds.), Business strategy in an artificial intelligence economy, new York, NY: 
Business Expert Press, New York 2018.
Penn 2017 - F. Penn,  Stephen Hawking: Self-evolving artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has a free will & may destroy H.,  https://
www.youtube.com/ watch?v=U2yhVCTC4sg (accessed 17 March 2019).
Sachs 2015 - J.D. Sachs, The Age of sustenaible development, Columbia University Press, new York 2015.
Sainato 2015 - M. Sainato, Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, and Bill Gates warn about artiﬁcial intelligence, in «The Observer», 
https://observer.com/2015/08/stephen-hawking-elon-musk-and-bill-gates-warn-about-artiﬁcial-intelligence/ (accessed 
30 March 2019).
