The complexity of the climate-economy nexus: agent-based modelling and policy evaluation

UNIVERSITY OF GENOVAPHD PROGRAM IN MECHANICAL, ENERGY AND MANAGEMENTENGINEERING - CURRICULUM: ECONOMICS AND MANAGEMENTThe complexity of the climate-economy nexus:agent-based modelling and policy evaluationbyMarcello NiedduThesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (XXXV cycle)May 2023Prof. Marco Raberto SupervisorProf. Giovanni Berselli Head of the PhD programThesis Jury:Luca Riccetti, Università di Macerata External examinerCiro Troise, Università di Torino External examinerLinda Maddalena Ponta, Università di Genova Internal examinerDepartment of Mechanical, Energy, Management and Transportation EngineeringDeclarationI hereby declare that except where specific reference is made to the work of others, thecontents of this dissertation are original and have not been submitted in whole or in partfor consideration for any other degree or qualification in this, or any other university. Thisdissertation is my own work and contains nothing which is the outcome of work done incollaboration with others, except as specified in the text and Acknowledgements. Thisdissertation contains fewer than 65,000 words including appendices, bibliography, footnotes,tables and equations and has fewer than 150 figures.Marcello NiedduMay 2023AcknowledgementsI would like to acknowledge all the researchers who have contributed to the creation anddevelopment of the Eurace model, which has been the starting point of my research work.I also want to thank Marco Raberto, my PhD supervisor, for the help and advice he hasgiven me and which have guided my work.A special thanks goes to Prof. Silvano Cincotti, Prof. Linda Ponta and Prof. AndreaTeglio, for the fruitful discussions and interactions I had with them during my three years ofPhD.Finally, I would like to thank Elisa, all my relatives, friends and associates who havebeen close to me during these years.AbstractWhile the consensus on the urgency of climate actions has grown in the last decades, what isthe pathway to be followed to translate proposal into actions is still argument of debates inthe climate change economics literature. Most economists believe that carbon pricing is themain and the most efficient option to reduce GHGs emissions, however a growing number ofworks point out that this result is highly dependent on the type of model used, claiming thesuperiority of a policy mix when a more realistic representation of the economy is used.My research work deals with the study of different climate policies with a complexsystem science approach, in particular, using the Eurace macroeconomic agent-based model.This work has two main objectives: first, to test the common belief that the carbon tax policyis the main and powerful instrument we have to induce the desired climate transition; second,to study the policy mix problem within the Eurace model economy, in particular, a mix of acarbon tax and a feed-in tariff policy.I enriched the Eurace model with a new agent, the climate module, to account forthe climate-economy feedback. The economy affects the climate through greenhouse gasemissions from fossil fuels use for the energy production while the climate affects theeconomy damaging physical capital, with damages dependent on the temperature anomaly.Moreover, I introduced heterogeneity in the capital good sector, in order to include energyintensity improvements as a factor of technological change. In order to establish a relationbetween real world and model quantities, I followed an initialization procedure based onimposing physical constraints on model’s quantities.I have developed an extended multi-criteria analysis method to evaluate policies perfor-mance accounting for both multiple objectives and variability of the outcomes of computa-tional experiments.To pursue the research objectives I performed a set of computational experiments withthe Eurace model, in which I analyzed a carbon tax policy, a feed-in tariff policy, anda mix of the two policies. Results of computational experiments show that the carbontax is not the best performing climate policy when analyzed with the Eurace model, boththe feed-in tariff and the policy mix perform better. This result is independent from theivpresence of climate damages. In absence of climate damages the PM performs better than itscomponents, however, climate damages reduce the positive effects of the interaction betweenthe components leading to higher economic costs for the same emission reduction obtained.According to the extended multi-criteria analysis, in presence of climate damages, the feed-intariff policy is almost always preferred to the policy mix.Table of contentsIntroduction 11 Complexity and climate change economics 31.1 The climate change problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61.3 Limits of the mainstream approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142 Research purposes and adopted methodology 162.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162.1.1 Carbon tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162.1.2 Policy mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182.2 Developing an extended multi-criteria analysis for policy evaluation . . . . 212.3 Agent-based modelling for climate change economics . . . . . . . . . . . . 253 New features of the Eurace model to assess the climate change problem 293.1 The addition of Climate module and climate-economy interaction . . . . . 313.2 Improving the energy sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333.3 Heterogeneity of capital goods producers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 373.4 Technological progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393.5 Climate policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 403.6 Physical dimensioning of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 413.7 Stylized facts reproduced by the Eurace model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 454 Computational experiments 474.1 Experimental setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 474.2 Results and comparison of climate policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 494.3 Results and comparison of climate policies under climate damages . . . . . 624.4 Extended multi-criteria evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69Table of contents vi4.5 Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75Conclusions 82References 85Appendix A Temporal evolution of the Eurace model 93IntroductionClimate change is one of the major threat to human societies, its negative effects are increasingand some changes are likely to be irreversible in the course of this century. The consensus onthe urgency of climate actions has grown in the last decades due to both increased evidenceon climate change and its negative consequences and to the rise of recent protest movementssuch as Fridays For Future or Extinction Rebellion. To respond to the climate changechallenges many countries have committed to reach the net zero emissions target by the2050. According to IEA (2021), these pledges cover about 70% of global GDP and CO2emissions. However, what is the pathway to be followed to translate proposal into actions isstill argument of debates in the climate change economics literature. The reasons are multipleand connected to each other: there are different opinions on what objectives to pursue, whatare the risks and uncertainties associated with climate change and their magnitude, what arethe most appropriate tools to evaluate the consequences and benefits of a given transitionpathway. The most used tools to evaluate climate policies are the integrated assessmentmodels (IAMs), that represent the evolution of both the climate and the economy (Weyant(2017)). They are grounded in general equilibrium theory and given the strong assumptionson which they are based, they are not considered able to represent the complexity of theclimate-economy system (Balint et al. (2017); Farmer et al. (2015)).My thesis adopt the complex systems approach to the climate change problem, and it hastwo main objectives related to this choice. The first objective is to test the common beliefthat the carbon tax policy is the main and powerful instrument we have to induce the desiredclimate transition (Tol (2017)). The second one is to study the policy mix problem within acomplexity perspective, in particular, a mix of a carbon tax and a feed-in tariff policy. Thismeans finding the combinations that outperform their single components and, among these,finding the best performing one (Bouma et al. (2019)).To pursue the objectives the thesis work relies on the agent-based modeling approach,in particular I performed a set of montecarlo experiments with the macroeconomimc Eu-race agent-based model, enriched to account for the climate-economy nexus and for othercharacteristics of the climate change problem (Nieddu et al. (2022, 2023b)). Moreover, ITable of contents 2have developed an extended multi-criteria analysis to evaluate the policy performance andto compare different policies, in a context of uncertainties of the outcomes, and multipleobjectives (Nieddu et al. (2023a)).The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. The first chapter presents the climatechange problem, remarking the need for a complex science approach. After recalling themain properties of complex systems relevant to the climate change problem, it is shown whyclimate and economy can be considered complex systems. Finally, IAMs and their mainlimitations are described.Chapter 2 describes the objectives of the thesis and the methodology used. Concerningthe first objective, the chapter presents the carbon tax policy and the theoretical grounds ofthe belief that it is the best climate policy. Then, to explain and motivate the second objective,it is presented the policy mix problem: the main motivations for preferring policy mix tosingle policies given in the literature are presented, and it is described what are the mainsteps to study a policy mix.The third chapter is dedicated to the description of the Eurace model and to the enrichmentmade to pursue the thesis objectives. In particular, the chapter presents the climate module,implemented to account for the climate-economy feedback, and a detailed description of theprocedure adopted to set model parameters and initial conditions, based on imposing a set ofphysical and economic constraints on the model.Chapter 4 presents the experiments performed and discusses the results. After a de-scription of the experimental settings, the channels through which emission reductions andeconomic costs emerge are shown for each of the policies considered. Policies are firstcompared looking at their average consequences and benefits without expliciting a preferencestructure. Then, policies are compared accounting for the volatility of their consequencesthrough the extended multi-criteria analysis.Finally, in the conclusions section, the main results of the thesis are summarized anddiscussed together with limitations of the work and future research directions.Chapter 1Complexity and climate changeeconomics1.1 The climate change problemThe Earth climate remained relatively stable to allow human life to survive for millions ofyears. That is, atmospheric temperature, pressure and composition have varied within alimited range during this period. However, large scale changes have continually occurredduring Earth history, such as periods of glaciation, widespread and persistent volcanic activity,variations in the Earth’s orbit and axial tilt, and changes in the distribution of continents andoceans that affected global ocean currents and atmospheric circulation patterns. In recentyears, we are witnessing global warming and other climate changes unprecedented overcenturies to millennia. We know from paleoclimate data that current multi-decadal ratesof change of global mean surface temperature are the highest observed over the past twothousand years (Pages 2k Consortium (2019)); that the global mean sea level rise in the lastcentury has been faster than the previous three thousand years (IPCC (2021)); and morestrikingly that the rate of increase of CO2 concentrations in the last hundred years is oneorder of magnitude higher than the highest rate of increase observed over the previous twohundred thousand years (Marcott et al. (2014)).Although the total greenhouse gases (GHGs) concentration in the atmosphere is about0.05% (excluding water vapor), a seemingly negligible fraction, it has been shown that theactual increase of global temperatures is correlated with the increase of GHGs concentration(IPCC (2021)). Furthermore, there is high evidence that the actual increase of the GHGsatmospheric stock is caused by human activities: emissions of greenhouse gases in the1.1 The climate change problem 4atmosphere from energy production and use, as well as from industrial processes, agriculturalactivities and deforestation are among the most important factors.Human impact on the climate system can be traced back to the industrial revolutions. Theuse of machines powered by the cheaper fossil energy sources for industrial production andtransportation, the increased connectivity, the innovations in the organization of productionwere essential to create a virtuous circle of increasing supply and demand, as new technologiesand innovations led to a decrease of production costs, and then a growth in the demand forgoods and creation of new jobs, which in turn stimulated new innovations and development.Nations that underwent industrialization witnessed a sharp surge in their material prosperity,often expressed as a hockey-stick growth of GDP per capita.1The industrial revolutions brought about not only technological innovations, but alsoradical changes to the economy and to the society: the capitalist economic system, in whichthe production is undertaken by firms that own the machines and use labor force of employees,and the capitalist society, in which a minority of capitalists own the means of production andhas the largest share of wealth and a majority offer its workforce, were born. Individualism,competition, the pursuit of profit, and wealth accumulation were placed at the heart of a newsocial value system.Although several changes occurred since the first industrial revolution, some core char-acteristics have survived till today: the permanent technological progress, the assessmentof well-being and living standards by materialistic measures, the more recent belief thateconomic growth is necessary to increase the general well-being. Therefore, in a capitalisteconomy the problem of climate change is expressed as finding a way to avoid impactson environment still maintaining economic growth. Although in this work I will use theeconomic growth as a measure of policy performance, this is not the only nor the mostappropriate criteria through which evaluating policies. GDP does not include importantfactors contributing to the well-being of people, such as free time or environmental and socialquality. However, even if we are willing to give up economic growth, climate change remainsan exceptional challenge for our societies: we can not simply turn off all factories to stopglobal warming. Materialistic needs are unavoidable, for example, food production can notbe interrupted. Moreover, materialistic needs depend on the social contest, as for the case offlights. In more general terms, the climate change problem can be formulated as how can wereduce our impact, avoid the worst consequences of climate change while avoiding economicand social crisis.1See for example https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/historys-hockey-stick-gross-domestic-product-per-capita-using-the-ratio-scale-19901.1 The climate change problem 5Climate change involves different physical phenomena such as global warming, sea levelrise, rainfall pattern shift, rise of extreme weather events frequency, etc. Climate impactsare not equally distributed among countries, and while the cost of mitigation will be felton the short and medium term, the benefits will manifest only in the long run. Impactsdo not manifest in the same place where GHGs emissions were generated and 
historicallyWestern nations have contributed the most to the GHGs concentration increase (IPCC (2021)).Therefore, the climate change problem is a global problem that involves coordination amongparties with different economic and geopolitical interests, historical responsibilities andgeopolitical power.In order to respond to the climate change threat different international treaty and frame-work were established. In 1988, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)was established by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the WorldMeteorological Organization (WMO) with the tasks of assessing scientific, technical andsocio-economic information relevant to understanding the risks of climate change, and toprovide advice to policymakers. In 1992, the United Nations Framework Convention onClimate Change (UNFCCC) was established with the objective of stabilizing greenhousegas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenicinterference with the climate system. In 1997, the Kyoto Protocol was adopted, which aimedto reduce greenhouse gas emissions that cause climate change. The protocol establishedbinding emission reduction targets for developed countries. Finally, in the 2015 the Parisagreement was adopted, with the aims to limit global warming to well below 2 degreesCelsius above pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increaseto 1.5 degrees Celsius. According to the agreement, parties (the nations signatories of theagreement) have to regularly compile a national greenhouse gas inventories reporting theirGHGs emissions, and they have to submit the Nationally Determined Contributions, that isthe announced and realized targets and plans to pursue the Paris agreement goals.To date, many nations have committed to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050, thesepledges covering about 70% of the global GHGs emissions (IEA (2021)). Nonetheless,according to the UNEP emission gap report (UNEP (2021)), the current National DeterminedContributions of the Paris agreement signatories are not sufficient to avoid a global warminggreater than 3°C by 2100.Policies are judged using knowledge from both empirical studies and theoretical models.It has been argued that the climate change problem calls for a radical change in the approachused to think at the economy: from the general equilibrium theory to complexity economics(see for example Farmer et al. (2015); Lamperti and Roventini (2022); Roos (2023)). I will1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 6show in the next section that viewing both the climate and the economy as complex systemshas important implications in the formulation of the problem, as well as in the choice of theinstruments (models) used to judge and design climate policies.1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systemsComplex systemsComplex systems are everywhere in our world, from our societies to the atmosphere of theEarth, from the Internet to the cells that constitute our bodies. Due to their transverse nature,the study of complex systems involves many disciplines, each contributing with its ownscope, theoretical definitions and methodology. Then, there is not a precise and commonlyaccepted definition of complex system. Nevertheless, there are common features in almostall definitions that allow to understand the term. A complex system is a system composedby a usually large number of heterogeneous elements that interact, often non-linearly, witheach other and with the environment in which they operate. Complex systems are in generaldifficult to treat with analytical solvable models. Even when it is possible to write down aset of equations for the evolution of the variables representing the state of the system, it isdifficult or impossible to solve analytically this system. Complex systems require the use ofnon-linear models, out-of-equilibrium descriptions and computer simulations.A non-linear system is one in which the future state is related to previous states and toeventual external forcings by a non-linear transformation involving squares of or productbetween previous states and external forcings. A more common sense definition, inspiredby the properties of non-linear systems, is that in non linear systems, small changes inpart of the system or in the external forcing can result in radical changes in the evolutionof the system. Non-linear systems are often characterized by high sensitivity to initialconditions, irreversibility, hysteresis, path-dependence and phase transitions. This means thatthe evolution of the system depends on the previous history, that the system can overcometo abrupt and sudden changes both for internal or external small changes and that it can bedifficult or impossible to reverse an occurred change.An important feature of complex systems is emergence. In these systems, the behavior ofthe system is not encoded in the properties of the elements, but emerges as a result of thelocal interaction between elements. Relevant examples are fish school and birds flockingbehavior. Fish schools are not formed from the top-down, that is, there is no one fish or groupof fishes ordering others how to behave. Each fish simply watches the nearby fish and adjusts1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 7its speed to the changes in speed of the neighbours. If there are enough fishes eventually thefish school emerges.Elements in complex systems are often organized in structures at different levels or scales:elements are divided in groups whithin which individuals behave similarly. Once groups areformed, they influence and are influenced by the global pattern as well as individual behavior.Social communities are examples of such coherent structures. Individuals belonging toa community are similar or behave similarly, have similar representations of the world,and share a system of values and judgments. Communities are further splitted in smallercommunities. Community rules regulate the interactions between individuals among thecommunity and with individuals belonging to other communities. However, new ideas froma small group of a community can change radically the whole community. This is the reasonwhy complex systems cannot be effectively studied with purely reductionist or purely holisticapproaches. There are not fundamental microscopic laws from which the global behaviorcan be deduced, since the global pattern emerges from interactions and is not encoded inthe components. At the same time, the behavior of the elements is not solely determined bythe system, to implement a certain functionality, because the global behavior is continuallyaffected by the adaptation and changing behavior of the elements.Another important aspect of complex systems is related to power laws distributions ormore in general to fat-tailed distributions. Often properties of constituents, like incomeof economic agents, or the occurrence of certain events are distributed according to powerlaws distributions. This implies a high degree of heterogeneity in the system, for example,referring to the income distribution in a nation, when the distribution is a power law there aremany individuals with an income roughly equal to the average income and a few individualsthat have an income orders of magnitude greater than the average income. While theoccurrence of extreme events is roughly forbidden with uniform, Gaussians and similardistributions, it is expected with heavy-tailed ones. Power laws distributions are related toanother characteristic of complex systems, to talk about which it is useful to use the theoryof complex networks. The elements of a system are represented by nodes, while interactionsbetween couple of elements are represented by links connecting the nodes. The number oflinks of a node is called degree. One of the most important characterization of networksis to understand the degree distribution. It has been shown that in a large number of realsystem the degree is distributed according to a power law distribution (Albert et al. (1999);Faloutsos et al. (1999); Huberman and Adamic (1999)). That is, in real networks thereare many nodes with a degree similar to the average degree and few nodes, termed hubs,with a degree several order of magnitude greater than the average degree. The occurrence1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 8of hubs is connected to the organizing principles according to which the network forms.Indeed, if the links between nodes are established at random, the degree is distributed moreuniformly and hubs do not occur.2 The presence of hubs is connected to different propertiesof real networks. Real networks show enhanced robustness to random removal of nodes withrespect to random or lattice networks (Albert et al. (2000)). That is, while lattices or randomnetworks break down in disconnected pieces when a fraction of nodes above a thresholdfraction strictly lower than one is removed, to break down a real network it is necessary toremove almost all the components. This is mainly due to the role of hubs: while it is difficultfor a hub to be randomly removed because the fraction of hubs is negligible, they guaranteenetwork connection thanks to their high number of links. However, hubs are responsiblefor the fragility of real network to target attacks. When nodes are removed starting fromthose having the highest degree, the fraction of removed nodes necessary to break downthe network is very low and far from one. In random networks instead, target attacks haveroughly the same effect of random attacks since the degree is homogeneously distributedamong nodes and there are no hubs. Without explicitly using the language of network theorywe can state that, often complex systems exhibit robustness against random fluctuations, butshow fragility against events affecting functional parts.Elements in real complex system live and operate in a physical environment, and interactwith it. However, the environment for an individual is not just the physical environment, butit is constituted also for example by structures present in the systems, by the networks ofdifferent relations existing between elements, by set of behaviors of the other elements, andso on. Individuals try to adapt to the environment and to its changes, and in doing so, theychange the environment. There is a feedback loop connecting the evolution of individualsand that of the environment: elements and environment co-evolve.Finally, I want to mention another property of complex systems relevant for the climatechange problem, that is complex systems are said to be "at the edge of the chaos". Thoughthe notion is not formally defined and it is not precise, it is generally meant that in system atthe edge of chaos one (or more parameters) regulating the dynamics of the system is close toa critical value beyond which the system becomes chaotic. Systems at the edge of chaos arein a zone between order and chaos. In response to a change in external conditions they canrespond transitioning to a chaotic phase that can result in profound structural changes of thesystem. Eventually the system return to an orderly phase, adapted to the new environmentalconditions.2Random assignation of links between a fixed number of nodes generate a random network, like theErdos-Renyi graph, in which the degree follows a Poisson distribution.1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 9The climate as a complex system.The Earth climate system is usually divided in five main components, termed "spheres": theatmosphere, that is composed by all the gases surrounding the Earth and is held by gravity;the hydrosphere, including all the liquid water of the earth, from oceans to lakes and rivers, tounderground water; the lithosphere, that is the solid outermost layer of Earth; the cryosphere,that includes all the ice in the Earth surface, from glaciers to ice caps and sea ice; and finallythe biosphere, that is constituted by all the living matter in the Earth.3All of these components can be considered complex systems in their turn, since theyshare the same characteristics of complex systems cited in the previous section. For example,the atmosphere and the oceans exhibit non linear behavior since they can be described byNavier-Stockes equations, that are non-linear partial differential equations used to describethe motion of fluids. Non-linear behavior characterizes also the other spheres, such as thebiosphere: small changes in the population size of a species at the bottom of a food chaincan have huge impacts on the whole system through chain reaction effects.Also the interactions between spheres have non-linear character. Spheres exchangewith each other energy, such as heat, radiation and mechanical energy, and matter, forexample through biogeochemical cycles or volcanic eruptions. Considering the hydrologicalcycle, hydrosphere and biosphere give water to the atmosphere during the evaporation,while water goes from the atmosphere to all the other spheres during precipitation. Smallchanges in atmospheric temperatures can have significant impacts on the hydrological cyclesince warming increase the evaporation rate that increase the water vapor atmosphericconcentration leading to further warming via greenhouse gas effect. Interactions betweenspheres are not captured only by the exchange of energy and matter. Each sphere, or partof it, can be considered as a border or environmental condition for the other spheres. Theborder condition of a sphere is not static and is influenced in its turn by the sphere dynamics.For example, the ocean free surface constitutes a border condition for the atmosphere andit is continually perturbed by winds and more in general affected by the evolution of theatmosphere.The climate system is forced by the flux of energy that comes from the Sun. The Earthin turn emits energy into space in the form of long-wave radiation. The incoming solarradiation is in part reflected and in part absorbed by the surface of the Earth, while part of thelong-wave radiation emitted by the Earth is absorbed by the GHGs of the atmosphere, and3However, there are other classifications of the Earth climate system that include additional spheres, such asthe Sixth Sphere framework, that includes the anthroposphere, or the Earth System Science framework thatcomprises the five spheres mentioned above as well as other components such as the magnetosphere.1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 10though part is emitted again by GHGs, the net balance is that less radiation is emitted intospace. Due to its curvature, the surface of the earth is heated unevenly by the sun: the energyper unit of time and surface area is maximum at the equator and minimum at the poles. Theglobal circulation pattern of the atmosphere and the oceans distributes the heat from theequator to the poles. Circulation patterns are driven by the differential heating of the Earthsurface, by the Earth rotation, by pressure and salinity gradients among the main factors, andare influenced by the interactions between spheres. In general, the climate system varies ona large range of spatial and temporal scales. These means that coherent structures of verydifferent size and life time coexist and interact with each other, from the circulation patternin the Hadley cells, to cyclones and vortexes, to wind patterns in a city. Therefore, the globalpattern of circulation is not just the result of external forcing, emerges from the interactionsbetween spheres and it is shaped by the constant emergence and disappearance of coherentstructures at all scales and their interactions.As mentioned in the introduction, although the climate remained relatively stable formillions of years, it has changed dramatically in the past, going from glacial eras in which thetemperature was low enough to allow the glaciation of poles, to warming periods in which noice was present in the Earth. In an ice age, glacial periods, characterized by cold temperaturesand the advance of ice from the poles towards the equator, alternate with shorter interglacialperiods, during which the ice cover retreats. Changes occurred both for external as well asinternal variability, and due to the non-linearity of the climate system, There are differentfeedback mechanisms, both positives and negatives, 
that affect climate system evolution,amplifying or reducing external changes as well as internal fluctuations. Examples of positivefeedback are the above mentioned water vapor feedback or the ice-albedo feedback: anincrease of temperature lead to a decrease of the ice covered surface leading to a decreaseof the surface albedo, that results in a further increase of the temperature. The long waveradiation feedback is an example of negative feedback: a warmer Earth will increase emissionof long wave radiation that lead to a decrease of the temperature.It is therefore difficult to determine the climate response to changes in the GHGs concen-tration, and even more difficult to determine the impacts of the climate response on humansocieties. This difficulty is exacerbated by the presence of components with high inertia:even if we stop emitting GHGs now, the accumulated in the ocean will continue to heatthe atmosphere for centuries to millennia. Therefore, to reduce uncertainty through dataaccumulation, it is necessary to observe the climate systems for periods much longer thantime span considered useful for climate change mitigation.1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 11The climate system allows to show another type of problem, related to data, that canemerge when analyzing complex systems, that in the context of climate models is known as"the parametrization problem" (see for example Provenzale (2014)). Consider for examplethe atmosphere. Since models can not include all the details of their target systems, aspatial and temporal scale have to be chosen. The atmosphere is divided in a large numberof parallelograms whose size determine the spatial resolutions of the model. Inside eachparallelogram the relevant variables, such as temperature, pressure, chemical composition,and so on, are assumed homogeneous. Then, the equation of fluid dynamics are used to evolvethe system. The homogeneity assumption implies neglecting the internal dynamics insideeach parallelogram, and in particular means assuming that the dynamics of all structureswhose typical size is lesser than one of the sides of the parallelogram is dominated by anddo not influence the macro dynamics of the parallelogram. Though in climate models theinternal dynamics influence is to a some extent taken into account through parametrization,the larger scale dynamics of the parallelogram is supposed to dominate the lower scale, sinceparametrization is expressed in terms of large scale variables while lower scale variablesare excluded from the analysis. Since the climate presents coherent structures at all scales,the parametrization problem does not disappear just improving the resolution of models.Increasing data storage capacity, increasing computational power and the development ofknew data processing techniques give hope for an increase in understanding, in a progressivereduction of the uncertainties in understanding the climate, but are not enough. As recognizedby the IPCC in its latest assessment report (IPCC (2021)), the progress made by climatemodels with respect to the time of the previous report was modest, despite the increasedspatial resolution of new climate models. The parametrization problem imposes us tounderstand better the link between elements and system, the link between different scalesphenomena and more in general, how the global pattern emerges from the system componentsbehavior.Adopting a complex system approach to describe the climate system has important im-plications for the climate change problem. First, it is a problem that involve fundamentaluncertainty, that is a problem in which the probabilities distributions of certain variables orevents are not known. As we have seen, there are processes affecting climate change, the un-derstanding of which requires future observations over centuries or millennia. Moreover, newand more data, and increasing computational power will not guarantee alone a reduction ofuncertainties, we really need a better understanding of complex systems. Furthermore, sincecomplex systems can have uncomputable dynamics, we are faced with the very possibilitythat uncertainties will be unavoidable at all.1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 12If the climate is seen as a complex system, it is much easier to accept the idea that climatechange involves numerous risks of various magnitudes, including catastrophes. The climatesystem interconnected components contribute to maintain the conditions that support ourexistence. Our life is based on a fragile system of interconnected meta-stable states. Thenon-linear behavior of the climate imply that small changes in the climate system can beamplified by numerous feedback mechanisms resulting in a global change in which humanlife supporting conditions can be severely affected or even destroyed. The climate system ischaracterized by tipping points, therefore some changes can be irreversible, and there can bea global climate tipping point beyond which the actual global warming will be unstoppable(Lenton et al. (2019)). In a context characterized by high and fundamental uncertainties theexistences of such risks leads to a preference for more cautious approaches in dealing withclimate change.The economy as a complex system.The economy is composed by many heterogeneous agents, usually grouped into institutionalsectors such as households, firms, banks, governments, that interact with each other incomplex ways, exchanging, among other things, money, goods, services, work, financialproducts.As remarked by Arthur (2021), agents in the economy make decisions in a contextcharacterized by fundamental uncertainty. First, they do not know the future states of theworld. Second, the result of their actions is influenced by the actions of the others. Therefore,in their decision making process, agents have to account for how the others make decisions.Decisions are based on expectations, not on complete and perfect information, as oftenassumed in general equilibrium models. The outcome of the decisions of all the agents givesrise to the global pattern, and it determines the success or the failure of a decision strategy insatisfying a certain purpose. Then, agents try to adapt to the others actions changing theirexpectations and strategies, in a continuous feedback loop of interaction between expectationsformation and actions.An illustrative example is provided by bubbles and crashes occurring in the financialmarket. A typical bubble can form because of a self-reinforcing process of diffusion of theexpectation of an increase in the price of a given asset (see for example, Arthur et al. (2018);Palmer et al. (1994)). When enough people are convinced that the price of an asset will rise,their purchase of assets causes the price of that asset to rise, confirming the initial expectationand causing this belief to spread to other people as well, determining a further growth inpurchases, and therefore in the price, of the asset in question. This process leads to a fast1.2 The climate and the economy as complex systems 13growth of the asset price, determining the formation of a bubble. The bubble can eventuallyburst due to a similar mechanism: a group of people, convinced of a future drop in the price,sell their holdings of the asset, causing a slowdown or decrease in the price. This spreads theexpectation of a decrease in the price and triggers further sales, and so on.The economy shows a non-linear behavior since small changes in part of the system or inthe environment can trigger radical changes in the whole economy. A relevant example is the2007-2008 financial crisis, in which the crisis in the US subprime mortgage market spreadto other markets until it affected the entire world economy (Crotty (2009)). Crawford et al.(2009) present a list of the damages that involved the other markets, reporting for examplethat the US stock market recorded a 1.3 trillion dollars of wealth-loss in a single day.Another example relevant for the climate change problem is the credit sector. Boss et al.(2004) analyzed the Austrian interbank market, showing that the resulting network, in whichlinks between banks are identified by liabilities directed from the debtor to the creditor, is ascale-free network, with power-laws in- and out-degree distribution with exponent 1.7 and3.1, respectively. As we have mentioned above, scale-free network are robust against randomfailure, but fragile against target attacks. Moreover, in scale-free networks the spread of adisease, than can be identified as a bank failure in this context, can occur even if the epidemicstart with only one bank failure (Barrat et al. (2008)). However, direct transmission betweenbanks is not the only way through which losses or defaults can propagate in the credit sector;according to Hellwig (2009), losses due to credit constraints in a non financial firm canfeedback to the banking system. Crisis in the financial system can emerge endogenously andcan feed-back to the real economy, leading to prolonged crisis (Riccetti et al. (2015, 2016,2018)).Climate transition risks (Monasterolo (2020)), i.e., risks deriving from the way the transi-tion is realized, are strictly related to financial contagion. Fossil fuel reserves, machines andinfrastructures for search, extraction and distribution of fossil fuels are currently evaluatedwithout an assessment of climate risks. According to IEA (2020b) the carbon content ofproved fossil fuel reserves is about 3000 GtCO2, much larger than the remaining carbonbudgets. If the world is to meet the Paris targets a large fraction of current reserves willbe unburnable and will become stranded (Carbon Tracker Initiative (2011)). The suddenintroduction of climate policies (Monasterolo et al. (2022a)), such as a global carbon tax(Monasterolo and Raberto (2018)) or a global cap on carbon stocks, as well as a technologicalshock or a sudden change in climate sentiments (Dunz et al. (2021b); Gourdel et al. (2022))can lead to an abrupt revaluation of carbon-intensive and low-carbon assets. The consequentlosses in the carbon-intensive sector can propagate through the financial networks, under-1.3 Limits of the mainstream approach. 14mining the financial stability and can affect the real economy. Moreover, climate transitionrisks can be exacerbated by events not directly related to the climate policies or even to theclimate change, such as the COVID-19 pandemics (Dunz et al. (2021a)).Viewing the economy as a complex system has important consequences for the climatechange problem. First, uncertainty is not confined to the climate systems, but presenteverywhere in the economy and is an important driver of the economy evolution. Second,since complex systems are rarely in a state of equilibrium, it is better to avoid assumingequilibrium behavior, in order to not neglect the factors that determine the change of economyover time (Arthur et al. (2018); Roos (2023)). As I will discuss in the next section, thisrequire a great change in how policies analysis and future economy projections are made,since the most used models are grounded on general equilibrium theory. As remarked byKirman (2016), adopting a complex system approach to evaluating policy interventionsmeans abandoning the attempt to restore the economy to a state of equilibrium from which ithad temporarily drifted away.1.3 Limits of the mainstream approach.Integrated assessment models (IAM), models where both the climate and the economy arerepresented, are the main tools used to evaluate mitigation and adaptation policies. Althoughexisting IAMs differ for the level of detail used to represent the climate and the economy,all include a representation of the carbon cycle, whose dynamics is influenced by GHGsemissions coming from economic activities; the resulting change in the climate system isused to determine impacts on the economy. The economic module is usually based onequilibrium theory.There are two fundamental types of IAMs: benefit-cost (BC-IAM) and process-based(PB-IAM) (Weyant, 2017). BC-IAMs (Hope, 2006; Nordhaus, 1993; Tol, 1997) use anaggregated representation of the economy and their main aim is to determine the optimalpolicy, for example, a carbon tax, that maximizes the discounted social welfare. They havebeen used to calculate the social cost of carbon (SCC) in USA (Interagency Working Groupon Social Cost of Greenhouse Gases, 2016). PB-IAMs (Fricko et al., 2017; Kriegler et al.,2017) offer a more detailed representation of the economic sectors, in particular the energysector, and of the climate and natural systems. Unlike the BC-IAMs, they are used mainly forcost-effectiveness analysis: they provide and rank (according to the cost) different trajectoriesof the outputs of all sectors that achieve a given level of emissions and a given temperaturetarget. PB-IAMs are used by IPCC to show trajectories compatible with 1.5 and 2 degrees1.3 Limits of the mainstream approach. 15(IPCC, 2018), by the central bank and financial regulators (Allen et al., 2020; Vermeulenet al., 2019) and by large investors for climate financial risk analysis (UNEPFI, 2020). Theywere used also in climate stress test exercises by Battiston et al. (2017) and are used by thenetwork for greening the financial system (NGFS) to develop scenarios for climate stress test(NGFS, 2020).As remarked in Farmer et al. (2015), IAMs are not able to deal properly with uncertainties,distributional issues, technological change associated with climate change. Based on therepresentative agent hypothesis, they do not account for agents heterogeneity and theirinteractions. Information asymmetries, different perceptions, imitation among agents can becrucial to the adoption of new green behavior or to the success of climate policies. Moreover,policies can have distributional impacts on income or wealth that can undermine theirefficacy and can result in political unrests. Furthermore, climate mitigation targets requirea large-scale transition to a low-carbon economy. Then, it is important to account for thecharacteristics of technological progress. Interactions between agents, limited informationand complementarities between technologies can lead to different lock-in states whereone type of technology prevails over the others. Equilibrium theory can not account forpath-dependency and multiple equilibria systems. Moreover, most original IAMs assumeexogenous technological progress. Their extensions, such as (Dietz e Stern 2015), includesendogenous progress; however, they do not account for the role of interactions. Moreover,they do not represent the financial sector, that is crucial to account for transition risks andevaluate financial climate policie (Battiston et al. (2021); Dunz et al. (2021a); Monasteroloet al. (2022b)). BC-IAMs are not suited to account for uncertainties of climate impacts, inparticular with extreme events. since the damage functions used in these models generateaggregated damages and can not account for the role of non uniform distribution of impacts.Though they have their own drawbacks, agent-based models can overcome the aboveIAMs limits, since they include the main elements of complex systems. As I will show inthe following, agent-based models are the instruments used in this work to study climatemitigation pathways.Chapter 2Research purposes and adoptedmethodologyMy research is focused on the analysis of climate mitigation pathways with a complex scienceapproach. My two main objectives are first, to test the common belief that the carbon taxpolicy is the main and powerful instrument we have to induce the desired climate transition;second, to study the policy mix problem, analyzing the mix between a carbon tax policy anda feed-in tariff policy.In the following section I will discuss about the theoretical foundation of the carbonpricing and of the policy mix applied to the climate change problem. Section 2.2 presents anextension of the multi-criteria analysis method, that I developed to evaluate policy perfor-mances and to compare different policies (see Nieddu et al. (2023a)).To study the climate policies I chose a complex system approach, and in particular, Iused the macroeconomic agent-based EURACE model which is described in the next chapter.The last section of this chapter describes the agent-based modelling approach, as 
well as itsapplications to the climate change problem.2.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change2.1.1 Carbon taxCarbon pricing is a fiscal policy measure that sets a price on GHGs emissions in order tomove economies toward low or zero carbon regimes. It can be of two forms. One is to put aprice on unit emissions through a tax; the other is to set a limit on allowable emissions andallow agents to trade their emission rights. The first carbon tax was introduced by Finland2.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change 17in the 1990. Today, there are 68 national and subnational carbon pricing initiative in place,covering about 23% of global GHGs emissions (World Bank (2022)).When implementing a carbon tax policy one has to take into account several characteris-tics. Since there are several greenhouse gases that contribute to global warming (CO2, CH4,N2O etc.) one of the characteristic of a carbon tax is the set of GHGs that it covers. Anotherimportant aspect is the set of actors that will pay the tax. Since each fuel has a differentdistribution system, one has to determine the point at which government could impose thetax. The choice may have serious consequences, as the yellow vests movement showed.Further, price trajectory is to be determined. Finally, one has to determine the use of revenues.Governments may use revenues simply to increase their budget, or they can use revenues tocounter carbon tax negative distributional impacts, or to finance other climate policies.Carbon tax is grounded on externality theory. An exeternality associated to an economicaction (the production or consumption of a good) is the effect of that action on parties thatdo not participate to the action. Under the assumptions that prices carry all the relevantinformation except that relative to the externality, that there are not other externalities andthat the market mechanism lead to efficient allocation of resources, to eliminate a negativeexternality it is sufficient to set a price (or increase its value) of the good associated to theexternality equal to the marginal cost of the externality. Climate change can be viewed as anexternality of the production and consumption of carbon intensive goods. Its marginal cost iscalled the social cost of carbon (SCC) and it is defined as the change in the discounted valueof social welfare caused by an additional unit of GHG emissions (Nordhaus (2017)). It isusually calculated through IAMs, although estimates are strongly dependent on the damagesfunction and the discount rate (to evaluate social welfare) used which are object of importantdebates in the literature, (see for example Stern (2008)).According to this framework establishing a carbon tax equal to the SCC will solvethe problems associated to the climate change, but in presence of other market failuresthe argument falls down. Real market are characterized by many other externalities anddistorsion, for example incomplete and imperfect information in capital market may give riseto credit rationing (Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)); this effect is enhanced for green investmentsand projects, characterized by higher uncertainties related to technological developmentand regulations (High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices (2017)). There are also climatechange specific market failures such as that related to short-terminism in climate actions: thepossible catastrophic consequences of climate change will be felt beyond the time horizonusually considered by economic agents (Carney (2015)).2.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change 18It is not clear how market failures, beyond that generated by the climate externality,affect the carbon tax performance. Some authors, e.g. Tol (2017), argue that other marketfailures reduce the efficiency of the carbon tax but it is still the best tool. Eventually, couplingthe carbon tax with other instruments that account for the other market failures can lead torecovering the efficiency loss. As described in the next subsection, other authors argue thatthe effect of the other market failures is more complex and needs further investigation.2.1.2 Policy mixAs mentioned in the introduction, carbon pricing is considered the most efficient option toreduce GHGs emissions (Nordhaus (2007); Tol (2017); Weitzman (2014)). Using other in-struments may lead to sub-optimal outcomes. In line with this argument, most environmentaleconomics works has focused on the analysis of single policies or on the comparison betweentwo or more instruments.However, an emerging body of works has questioned this argument and claims thesuperiority of a policy mix. Görlach (2014) points out that what the optimal policy is dependson what ’optimal’ is meant for. Carbon pricing may loose its best policy status when multipleobjectives and deviations from the models are present. These constitute also motivations forthe adoption of multiple instruments; as summarized by Bouma et al. (2019), the justificationsof a policy mix in the literature are: the existence of multiple objectives, the presence ofadditional externalities or more in general of market failures, as well as government andbehavioral failures.Beyond the GHGs emissions or stocks targets, and the economic efficiency or cost-effectiveness targets, climate policies have other objectives, such as the mitigation of dis-tributional consequences of policies, and the political feasibility (IPCC (2014)). Climatepolicies, such as carbon pricing, increase the cost of energy and fuels independently from theincome level, and then hit more the lower income households. Preventing such distributionalconsequences is relevant both for ethical considerations and for the feasibility of a climatepolicy, as shown in 2018 by the yellow vests protest against a French carbon tax.Adopting a multiple instruments analysis is relevant because countries have also otherobjectives beyond those of climate policies (for example SDGs) that may conflict or alignwith climate objectives. Furthermore, countries are de facto relying on instruments mixto enact their climate commitments. For example, the EU emission trading system standsbesides energy efficiency standards for vehicles and buildings, and interact with nationalcarbon taxes, incentives and other national and sub-national environmental policies.2.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change 19According to the Tinbergen rule (Tinbergen (1952)), the number of instruments have to beequal to the number of independent goals a policy maker wants to achieve. Then, because oftheir multiple objectives, climate mitigation interventions can not rely on a single instrument.However, even when there is a single target, the presence of other externalities may needmore than a single policy. According to the main result of the second best theory, whenmultiple market failures are present, targeting only one of them may results in an outcomeworse than the do-nothing case (Lipsey and Lancaster (1956)).Externalities, market power and imperfect information are the classical cause of marketfailures (Bator (1958); Randall (1983)), and are also used to justify the policy mix to tackle theclimate change problem. A well known example of relevant externality is the technologicalspillover externality, i.e. the benefits that a technological improvement discovered by onegives to the other actors that imitate the new technology. If only a carbon tax is raised tooffset the climate externality, the disincentive to R&D due the technological spillover mayresult in underinvestment in the development of new cleaner technologies and then, in anemission reduction smaller than planned. Then, a combination of subsidies for correcting thetechnological spillover and a form of carbon pricing is considered a more efficient solution byseveral authors (Goulder and Schneider (1999); Jaffe et al. (2004); Sorrell and Sijm (2003)).The superiority of a policy mix is claimed also when imperfect information is considered(Bennear and Stavins (2007); Jaffe et al. (2004); Lehmann (2012)). When agents are notwell-informed about the most efficient and cleaner available technologies, unless the relevantinformation is provided to them, they will be unable to significantly change their behavior,even if a carbon pricing policy is set up. Thought uncertainty can be considered a formof imperfect information, it is cited as another justification for a policy mix (Bouma et al.(2019)). For example, Lecuyer and Quirion (2013) suggest to complement an emissiontrading system (ETS) with subsidies for renewable energy when there are uncertainties onthe abatement cost function.Similarly to the concept of market failure, behavioral failures are referred to situations inwhich an unregulated economy do not achieve the maximum welfare state because agentsbehave differently from what rational choice theory prescribes (Shogren and Taylor (2020)).Therefore, Shogren and Taylor (2020) argue that a single instrument to limit emissions is notnecessarily welfare-enhancing in an economy with behavioral failures. Inspired by, amongothers, the work of Simon (1987) and by prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky (1979);Tversky and Kahneman (1974)), behavioral economics (Thaler (2016, 2018)) has so farcollected numerous anomalies in the behavior of people, and has also proposed alternativesolutions to problems in which these anomalies are relevant. Mullainathan and Thaler (2000)2.1 Analyzing mitigation policies for climate change 20found that at least three main categories of divergences from rational behavior occur in realeconomies: bounded rationality, bounded willpower and bounded self-interest. Agents arebounded rational because of their limited problem solving capabilities and because of thelimited time to solve the problems they face. To simplify their problems people use rules-of-thumb, that can led them to make systematic errors, i.e. choices different on average fromthe rational ones Kahneman and Tversky (1979); Tversky and Kahneman (1974). Even if thecomputed response is that of rational theory, real agents have difficulties to enact their longterm plans (bounded willpower), and self-interest is not the main motivation for every agent.Market-based instruments aimed to correct environmental externalities can fail becauseagents’ response to the same price signal are heterogeneous and there can be people thatwill not change their behavior for incompetence, ignorance, intransigence (Gunningham andSinclair (1999)), or because behavior is not based on rational choice but on habit (Twomeyet al. (2012)). Similarly, agents’ response to information-based policy (policies aimed totackle market failures due to the lack of information) are heterogeneous and influenced by(real) behavioral factors (Ferraro and Miranda (2013); Weaver (2014)); therefore, it is likelythat a policy that neglects behavioral factors will not lead to the desired behavior change.The characteristics of a real system that diverges from the idealized model can haveinfluence on policy evaluation. Until now, we identified these characteristics with the causesof market and behavioral failures. These notions are based on the equilibrium assumptions.What if real economy evolves out-of-equilibrium?According to Kirman (2016), one can not consider theorems of the existence of anequilibrium state, like that of Arrow and Debreu (1954), as proofs of the equilibriumassumptions, both because the uniqueness of equilibrium in not granted even under thestringent conditions of the existence theorems (Debreu (1974); Mantel (1974); Sonnenschein(1972)), and because economists have not been able to prove that, starting from an out-of-equilibrium state, an economy of rational agents will necessary converge to an equilibriumstate.Therefore, a policy that results optimal according to an equilibrium model, may be noteffective when implemented in real systems because of the out-of-equilibrium dynamics. Forexample, if a price of GHGs is established in an economy that does not reach an equilibriumstate, the quantity of GHGs emitted will be different from (and likely higher than) theequilibrium quantity associated to the GHGs price. Note that this is not an argument for an"equilibrium failure", since the concept of failure makes no sense outside the equilibriumtheory. In line with Kirman (2016), we argued that the task of a climate policy analysis isnot to find the condition under which, given the multiple failures, the free market condition2.2 Developing an extended multi-criteria analysis for policy evaluation 21(perfect competition, perfect information and so on) are restored and the system reaches thedesired state; the task is to understand the performance of the policy under analysis, be ita single instrument policy or a policy mix, in a complex economy that continually evolveout-of-equilibrium.Though so far I enlisted arguments in favor of a policy mix, not all mixes of instrumentsperform better than their components, and there is not a rule to establish if there is synergybetween two or more instruments, or if conflicting interactions prevail. Therefore, one of thetwo main tasks of the research on policy mix is to understand the interactions of instrumentsand to characterize the set of mixes that outperforms their components (Bouma et al. (2019)).The second main task is to define and find the best mix among those outperforming theircomponents.2.2 Developing an extended multi-criteria analysis for pol-icy evaluationCost-benefit analysis (CBA) and cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) are among the mostused quantitative methods to compare different climate policies and to establish which isthe best one (IPCC (2014)). CBA (Boardman et al. (2017)) compares different policiesby evaluating their costs and benefits, and it chooses the alternative that has the greatestnet benefit. In addition to the problems concerning the aggregation of individual welfarefunctions, cost-benefit analysis requires that all the benefits and costs of each policy beexpressed in monetary value. CEA (Ekholm (2014)) does not require the evaluation of thebenefits, the choice between different alternatives is made first by excluding those that donot reach a predetermined goal, for example a certain level of emission reduction, then bycalculating the costs of the remaining alternatives and finally by choosing the policy with thelowest cost. Both methods rely on a single metric to measure policy performance. However,as suggested by Greening and Bernow (2004), a single metric can not represent properly theconsequences of climate policies.Multi-criteria analysis (MCA) allows to use multiple evaluation criteria, without requiringa unique metric to measure policy consequences (Keeney et al. (1993)). The first step of theanalysis is to define the objectives , the attributes needed to measure those objectives, andthe set of possible alternative policies to choose from. In the second step, the probabilitydistributions of the consequences are determined for each alternative. Third, the preferenceson the space of consequences must be made explicit by means of an utility function. Finally,2.2 Developing an extended multi-criteria analysis for policy evaluation 22for each policy the average utility is calculated and the policy with the highest average utilityis chosen.Before going on, it is necessary to clarify why I used the expected utility theory in anagent-based model, since the principle of maximization of expected utility is one of the maintargets of the criticisms of equilibrium models, and one of the reasons for preferring ABM.The main arguments against this principle are that, combined with other assumptions such ascomplete and perfect information, unbounded computational power, etc, it is used to describeagent behavior. In contrast, the aim of this work is to rationally evaluate the consequencesof different policies, obtained from a model that does not rely on the utility maximizationprinciple, and where the evolution of the system is obtained in a bottom-up fashion. Herethe expected utility theory is used as a normative theory, to describe how decision should bemade, and not as a descriptive theory. For instance, the preferences and choices of policymakers who deny climate change are excluded from this analysis. Moreover, the expectedutility theory is more appropriate than 
other